

I believe life balance means different things to different people. To me, life
balance is about balancing the demands of being everything to everyone while
not losing my sense of self, my needs, and my passions in the process. Life
balance means balancing the needs of my inner authentic self and the needs of
all of the other things that demand my time, attention, and energy.


Life balance is a process, not a destination. I work hard to incorporate my needs and
passions into my life. And since my needs and passions can change overtime, I also
work on assessing my needs and passions on a regular basis. After years of living and
breathing my passion for life balance, I have developed a life balance framework that
works. Here is a quick summary…


1.   Spend significant time discovering your authentic needs and passions.

2.   Write down your life balance intentions and look at them often.

3.   Hold yourself accountable.

4.   Practice being selfish. Self nurture and self nourish your body, mind, and spirit.

5.   Take action. Be bold and daring and move forward with your dreams.

6. Celebrate your life and all of your success. Life can be hard sometimes but there is
a lot to celebrate if you can find time for gratitude.

7. Share your stories with others. What you focus on expands so talk about your life
balance goals as much as possible.

8. Reflect and assess your actions on a regular basis to determine if you are off
balance in any areas of your life.

9.   Repeat the process and continue on your journey (back to #1).

One thing I know for sure is that life balance is a process/journey, not a destination.




What are you most grateful for? Take 5 minutes and write down everything in your life
that brings you joy. Ready? Set! ... BEGIN!


On the flip side …


What would you love to be rid of? Take 5 more minutes to list the activities in your life
that have become a drag and have run their course. You really do have the time to do
this exercise in awareness. Ready? Set! ... Begin!


Simple ...


Nothing more than a quick comparison and contrast of what inspires you and recharges
your batteries compared to the things that drain your energy and suck the life out you.


When you focus on this exercise you will begin to experience some clarity, relief and
order. Want to take this to the next level? I thought you might.


Groovy Action Plan

   •   What is the most audacious thing you would like to do?

   •   What small treat or treasure will being you joy today?

   •   What stimulates your intellectual curiosity?

   •   What stale responsibilities can you walk away from?

   •   Is there ONE habit you can you change to improve your life?




1. Forget the myth that happiness is elusive and unattainable, and that it’s something
that either happens or it doesn’t. Being happy is a choice.

2. Expand your understanding of health to include happiness. Here’s a quote from
Deepak Chopra, one of the world’s foremost experts on the mind-body connection:

        “Health is not just the absence of disease. It’s an inner
        joyfulness that should be ours all the time - a state of positive
        well-being.”


3. The term Gross National Happiness (GNH) was first expressed by the King of
Bhutan, His Majesty Jigme Singye Wangchuck, and it’s rooted in the Buddhist notion
that the ultimate purpose of life is inner happiness. Wangchuck maintains that economic
growth does not necessarily lead to contentment, so instead of merely focusing on
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), he focuses on the four pillars of GNH: economic self-
reliance, a pristine environment, the preservation and promotion of Bhutan’s culture,
and good governance in the form of a democracy. Follow Bhutan’s lead: instead of
simply calculating your net worth, start calculating your net happiness.

4. Living in the moment, which we aim to achieve through the practice of mindfulness,
has been shown to be linked to positive emotions and physical well-being.

5. Research shows that meditation stimulates the left anterior temporal region of the
brain, which is active during sensations of happiness and positive emotion.

6. Enrique Peñalosa, the former mayor of Bogota, Colombia (population 7 million),
sought to create a city of joy–in terms of transportation and urban design–that
supported social interaction and equity, and that honored the sacredness of people and
the environment. During his tenure he created urban infrastructure and public space
that gave priority to children and to those who don’t own an automobile. Here is a quote
from Peñalosa:


         “We had to build a city not for businesses or automobiles, but for
         children and thus for people. Instead of building highways, we
         restricted car use. We invested in high-quality sidewalks,
         pedestrian streets, parks, bicycle paths, libraries; we got rid of
         thousands of cluttering commercial signs and we planted trees.
         All our everyday efforts have one objective: happiness.”


Organize your space around the concept of creating happiness.

7. Let go of idea that happiness equals consumption. Positive psychology is
affirming that once we meet our basic needs, the experience of authentic happiness has
much more to do with intrinsic factors such as self acceptance, meaning, empathy and
love.

8. Act in ways that are socially and environmentally responsible. You may take
great pleasure in drinking your morning coffee, and this pleasure can be accompanied
by feelings of satisfaction and happiness. However, if you’re not drinking fair trade
coffee, that happiness is not sustainable.

9. Dan Baker, a clinical psychologist whose practice draws on the science of happiness,
writes that the greatest barrier to individual happiness is fear. He concludes that all of
our fear can be grouped into three basic fears: survival; fear of not having enough, and;
fear of not being enough.

He explains that as long as we are operating out of fear, rather than love, we will
consistently pursue happiness in ways that are destructive for ourselves and others.

10. In the book Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make Things, McDonough and
Braungart pose the following question; “What if humans designed products and systems
that celebrate an abundance of human creativity, culture and productivity? That are so
intelligent and safe, our species leaves an ecological footprint to delight in, not lament?”
Ask yourself how you can apply this concept in your life.






11. Encourage your city’s major to adopt the “Slow City Manifesto”. In his book In Praise
of Slow: How a Worldwide Movement Is Challenging the Cult of Speed, Carl Honoré
explores the benefits of slowing down and describes the Slow City movement in his first
chapter. He explains that many Italian cities have taken the Slow City pledge and are
working to improve the quality of life of their citizens:

         “The Citta Slow manifesto contains fifty-five pledges, such as
         cutting noise and traffic, increasing green spaces and pedestrian
         zones; backing local farmers and the shops, markets and
         restaurants that sell their produce; promoting technology that
         protects the environment; preserving local aesthetic and culinary
         traditions; and fostering a spirit of hospitality and
         neighbourliness.”


12. Call the “Laughter Yoga Hotline” and participate in a laughter yoga session in the
privacy of your home (it’s free, but you may have to pay a long distance fee depending
on your phone service plan).






Life Balance
     — By Alex Shalman, AlexShalman.com

          “To acquire balance means to achieve that happy medium
         between the minimum and the maximum that represents your
         optimum. The minimum is the least you can get by with. The
         maximum is the most you’re capable of. The optimum is the
         amount or degree of anything that is most favorable toward the
         ends you desire.” ~Nido Qubein


I see life balance as a table with 10 legs. All legs must be balanced, or else your table is
going to be shaky. Nobody wants to sit at a table that’s going to shake on them, and
likewise no one wants to be the sole-proprietor of a shaky life.

On the other hand, it’s practically impossible to be balanced in all aspects of your life. It
certainly isn’t human nature to find our personal equilibrium at a place where everything
is balanced. I think balance is an ideal, and a fun life challenge to strive for.

If your life is severely off balance then aspects of your life that are low will impede the
growth and success of those areas that are high. For example, it’s hard to have good
relationships with friends and family when you have temperament and emotional control
problems.

10 Essential Components of life Balance

1.     Health & Fitness

2.     Mental development & Education

3.     Work, Career, & Finances

4.     Social life & Relationships

5.     Home & Family

6.     Character, Integrity, Ethics & Virtues

7.     Emotion control & development





8.     Daily habits & routines

9.     Life purpose & contribution

10.    Spiritual development

These 10 components are all interwoven within your life. None of them are independent
of each other. The closer all of these components are to each other, meaning the more
balance you have, the more they’ll act as support for each other in your personal
growth.

The Imbalanced Life

Let’s be practical and realistic. Who do you know whose whole life is a perfect balance?
I can think of no human being, nor any fictional character who has achieved this ideal.
This doesn’t stop me from believing the optimal balance is something we should strive
for.

In my own life I think I’m doing fairly well with life balance. However, at the current
moment the finance leg of my table is doing sub-par to the rest of my areas. Instead of
letting this bring the other areas of my life down I’m figuring out ways to deal with the
situation in a positive way and I would even go so far as to say that it is a challenge that
I look forward to.

I don’t want to waste money on eating out. I remedy this by buying healthy food and
cooking it myself or with Marina. Not only am I spending less per meal then I would at a
restaurant but I have leftovers for up to 3 days. I’m also not in a position where I can
purchase too much entertainment, so I’ve made exercise as my number one source of
fun (next to writing articles for you guys!).

My diet consists of eating well, creating daily habits, exercising, and fasting. All of these
components serve to increase the self-discipline portion of my character. This reflects at
work, at my internship, and at the amount of articles I have been putting out lately.

I believe that because the legs are pretty well-balanced that instead of my finances
bringing everything down, the rest of the components act together to maintain balance.
Am I really broke if I still live below my means and take great pleasure in my life?
What does life balance mean to you?





Should The Poor Mexican Fisherman Give Up Contentment
for Cash? — By Evelyn Lim, Attraction Mind Map

In a quiet Mexican fishing village, an American who was on vacation saw a local
fisherman unloading his catch. He decided to approach him.


The American asked the fisherman, “Why are you finishing your day so early?” The
Mexican replied “Oh Senor, I have caught enough to feed my family and a little extra to
sell for today. It is now time to go for lunch with my family and have a siesta. In the
afternoon, I can play with my kids. In the evening, I will go to the cantina, drink a little
tequila and play the guitar.”


The business professor was horrified at the fisherman’s lack of motivation to succeed.
He answered, “If you stay out at sea until late afternoon, you will easily catch twice as
much fish. You can sell the extra, save up the money and in six months, maybe nine,
you will be able to buy a bigger and better boat, and hire some crew. Then you’ll be able
to buy a second fishing boat and hire another crew.”


He continued, “In another year or two, you will have the capital to buy a second fishing
boat and hire another crew. If you follow this business plan, in six or seven years, you
will be the proud owner of a large fishing fleet.”


“Just imagine that! Then you can move your head office to Mexico City, or even to L.A.
After only three or four years in LA, you float your company on the stockmarket giving
yourself, as CEO, aqa generous salary package with substantial share options. In a few
more years – listen to this! – You initiate a company share buy-back scheme, which will
make you a multi-millionaire! Guaranteed!”


The American got very excited at the prospect himself. He said, “I definitely know these
things. I’m a well known professor at the US Business School.”
The Mexican fisherman listened intently at what the animated American had to say.




When the professor had finished, the Mexican asked him, “But, Senor Professor, what
can a person do after getting millions of dollars?” Now, the American professor hadn’t
thought that far. He was taken aback by the question.


So he quickly figured out an answer “Amigo! With all that dough, you can retire. Yeah!
Retire for life! You can buy a little villa with a picturesque fishing village like this one, and
purchase a small boat for going fishing in the morning. You can have lunch with your
wife every day, and a siesta in the afternoon, with nothing to worry you. In the afternoon,
you can spend quality time with your kids, and after dinner in the evening, play guitar
with your friends in the cantina, drinking tequila. Yeah, with all the money, my friend, you
can retire and take it easy.” Puzzled with the American’s suggestion, the Mexican
fisherman replied, “but, Senor Professor, I do that already!”


Ajahn Brahm told the above story in last Friday’s talk on “Dealing with Uncertainties in
Life”. You can also read this story in Who Ordered This Truckload of Dung?, a book
written by him. Ajahn Brahm had related the same tale last Friday, to illustrate that
contentment is to be found in the Now. He pointed out that we do not need to get
materially rich first before we can feel happy.


Contentment or Cash?
In the story, the Mexican fisherman may be poor but he is contented. But what if he has
a desire to afford a better life for his kids? Realistically, most of us so have dreams of a
more abundant life. We would like to be able to afford beyond the basic necessities. We
desire the flexibility of working as and when we want to, without struggle and worry and
to have excess time to pursue our various interests. Is it possible to rewrite the story so
that the Mexican fisherman (or you for that matter) can have it all - money, loving
relationships, health, and joy - without any major sacrifices?


How would you strike a balance in your waking hours for today, whilst working
towards your dreams?






How to Balance Life Effortlessly
    — By Avani Mehta, Avani-Mehta.com

         Be aware of wonder. Live a balanced life - learn some and think
         some and draw and paint and sing and dance and play and work
         every day some. - Robert Fulghum


Life Balance is a topic which needs no introduction. All of us focus on balancing
different areas of our life - work, family, personal, social etc. We desire each of these life
areas to do well and sometimes we do a lot of juggling to make this possible.

However, wouldn’t it be great if we could remove the craziness, the rushing and
struggling and make the entire process of life balance effortless?

How To Balance Life Effortlessly

1. Be Clear Of Your Priorities
Like they say, no one ever wished to have spent more time in office on their death bed.
Why then do we keep doing such things (work ourselves to death)? What’s the point of
running after and achieving goals which don’t mean anything later on? No matter how
good we become at balancing life, we will not be happy if we are moving in the wrong
direction.

Being clear of priorities means finding out what is important and in which order.
Separate the essentials from the non-essentials. The lesser things you have on your
plate, the easier it will be to balance them.

2. Strengthen The Common Base
One way of balancing life is to pick each life area and work on it. The second way to
balance is to work on the common base i.e. work on those areas which will directly
create a positive impact on all aspects of life. Achieve maximum output while providing
minimum input by working on -






   •   Timeless Principles

We can only imagine how utterly confusing life would be if we were to lie all the time or
keep running away from truth. Where would life balance be, if we are not true to our
word? What would the purpose of life balance be if we cannot come from love and be
love to our loved ones? We would spend far more time creating troubles and time
pressing issues for ourselves rather than make life better.

By aligning self with timeless principles of truth, love, integrity etc we enable ourselves
to take right decisions even if they are difficult and stay true to them. These principles
form an unwavering core within us, they give us the stability required to balance
ourselves and our lives.

   •   Mind, Body & Spirit

Life, family, work, society, friends … if all of these have one obvious thing in common,
then that is you. And if you are to manage and balance all of these well, shouldn’t you
be balanced and fit as well? A weak mind, body or spirit will not be able to do justice to
either life areas.

By focusing on growing, strengthening and balancing yourself, you enable yourself to
give each area deserving work and attention. (This of course is not a reason to become
self centered and focus only on self.)

   •   Time Management

Usually the topic of balancing life revolves around proper time management which is fair
enough since there are only 24 hours in a day. We cannot create more time hence, we
rather learn to manage it well.

Proper time management includes creating a work-life boundary, creating
family/personal time, increasing productivity by increased/decreased use of technology,
forming better habits - being organized, reducing clutter etc.

3. Stand For Yourself
Whatever effort you put in to balance your life, know your priorities, understand and
work on the timeless principles, yourself or your time management is going to be




useless if you do not stand for yourself. There are three essential skills which should
become second nature to you if you wish to stand for yourself. They are -

   •   Being Decisive

Learn to make your own decisions and follow them through. Don’t allow anyone else to
make decisions for you. No one understands your priorities, principles and
commitments better than you. Taking guidance from your mentors is another matter, but
the decision should always be yours. If people are going to take decisions for you, then
you will keep trying to balance the outcomes of those decisions. To change the output,
work on input.

   •   Saying No

Although saying no forms an important part of time management and being decisive, it
deserves a special mention because without this skill, you will not be able to channel
your life in the direction you want. If you wish to separate the essentials and non-
essentials in your life, saying no will be required, if you wish to stay true to your
principles, saying no will be required. ‘No’ is “the word” in your vocabulary which you
should be most comfortable using.

   •   Taking Responsibility

Everything that has happened, is happening and will happen in your life is your
responsibility. While external forces do influence our lives in undesired ways, if we give
away responsibility, we give away the power to make a difference. Hence, no matter
what happens, whether your decisions have gone bad, or someone else’s, whether
someone else has created havoc in your lives, cheated you or not stayed true to their
word, take responsibility and keep the power over your life with you. Without taking the
responsibility to constantly work on balancing life no matter what, a balanced life is not
possible.

4. Myths About Balancing
Myths usually are trouble makers. They seem true to us and we naturally follow our
truth. However, when things don’t go as planned, we fail to identify these as the cause
and keep repeating our mistakes. There are three major myths about balancing as well.




When people begin thinking about balancing life and start working on it, these three
myths create havoc and confusion.

   •    Balance Means “Equal”

Balance means equal and hence, balancing life means distributing time equally
between all areas of life. This is a myth.

There will always be a time when one area of our life requires more attention than other.
Balancing life means to listen to and be aware of each area and its requirements.
Balancing life means accessing the wisdom within us and allocating time and attention
as required to each area.

   •    Balancing Formula Is Universal

Everyone seeks to balance life. If one person has cracked the code and found how to
balance life, it is ok to apply the same formula in our lives. Since we all are human
beings, the formula to balance life must be universally applicable. This is a myth.

Even though all of us are humans, we are unique individuals with unique life, priorities
and needs. We can get inspired and pick and choose ideas to apply to our lives, we can
learn from others success and failures; but we cannot do a copy paste. A blind copy-
paste will not work. You can say, to each, his own formula.

   •    Balance Is All About My Life

We think that when we learn to manage our time, balance our life, live life based on our
priorities, we have succeeded. We need to focus on balancing only our life. This is a
myth.

While predominantly balancing is about your life, an important aspect to balancing life is
balancing others lives as well. Since we live in an inter-dependant world, lives tend to
be inter-dependant and so does balance. For instance if life of our spouse or sibling is
not balanced, sooner or later it will impact our life balance. Moreover, if their life
imbalance is because of us, then it becomes our responsibility to make sensible
changes in our life so that both lives can be balanced.






5. Random Tips & Ideas
Here are some random tips and ideas on and about balancing life.

   •   Start small. Don’t plan to transform your entire life one shot. Go slow and steady.

   •   Pick up what seems easy enough to implement first. See positive results, gain
       confidence and then dive into the difficult ones.

   •   Have patience. It takes time to put everything back in balance.

   •   Stay aware of your life, stay alert so that you can bring balance back as soon as
       imbalance creeps in.

   •   Be present. A lot of imbalance in life is created because we are not truly present
       in the moment.

   •   Stay physically, emotionally and mentally in the same place.

   •   Balance is not about ‘either/or’. Balance is about ‘and’. Be creative to find
       solutions to your problem. Sometimes, you can have the cake and eat it too.

   •   Balance is about holding on and letting go. Key is in figuring out what to hold
       onto and what to let go.

   •   Balancing life is an ongoing process. It never ends.

   •   Enjoy the process. If you are not enjoying, then you are probably doing
       something wrong. Remember, the idea is to balance ‘effortlessly’.




The Awesomeness of Life
    — By Stephen Cox, Balanced Existence

Have you ever sat quietly and just wondered at the awesomeness of life? Have you
ever considered the colossal mystery that is existence? I’d be surprised if you hadn’t but
perhaps you may not have given the subject much thought. If that sounds like you then
try for just a moment to describe “existence”.

If you have given such questions a certain amount of thought then like me you probably
noticed how very wondrous and strange the world and our very existence at this time, in
this place, in this manner is. Don’t you find it amazing that all this has undertaken the
formality of actually existing?

         “A human being is a part of the whole called by us universe, a
         part limited in time and space. He experiences himself, his
         thoughts and feeling as something separated from the rest, a
         kind of optical delusion of his consciousness. This delusion is a
         kind of prison for us, restricting us to our personal desires and
         to affection for a few persons nearest to us. Our task must be to
         free ourselves from this prison by widening our circle of
         compassion to embrace all living creatures and the whole of
         nature in its beauty.” ~ Albert Einstein


Considering the nature of the universe it is very apparent at this time that the universe
emulates itself on all levels. The universe is apparently holographic. The nature of a
hologram is such that even the smallest piece of the hologram is an exact replica of the
entire hologram. Scale is something produced by limited human perceptions as is time
and disconnection as opposed to the gigantic all encompassing present and
interdependence or oneness.


There is no matter as such. Everything is consciousness observing consciousness. The
world is not stranger then we know. It is stranger than we can know!



It is amazing to know that every one of our cells have the exact same functions as our
macro body does. Our cells breath air, eat food, have circulatory systems, and eliminate
waste to name just a few emulations. Every one of our billions of cells is like this.
Together they form our macro-body. The universe is like those Russian dolls that stack
inside each other.

         “At the bottom every man knows well enough that he is a unique
         human being, only once on this earth; and by no extraordinary
         chance will such a marvelously picturesque piece of diversity in
         unity as he is, ever be put together a second time.” ~ Nietzsche


I will always remember as a child I sat comfortably in my father’s lap. I would hold his
big heavy calloused hand in my own small child hands. Sitting there I would turn his
hand over and then back again in a simply amazed and fascinated examination. Today I
look at my own hand and witness a mystery that many of the greatest minds that have
ever lived have failed to solve. I close my fist. Mind over matter.

Some of us may have lost our childlike wonder. I know for me personally the more I
read, the more I observe and experience the more wondrous I grow. I feel the totality of
my personality, my multiplicity of interests and evolving behavioral patterns are likely
well beyond any one person’s ability to grasp. Including my own.

I am quite simply a very strange person and am willing to bet that in reality we all are.
There is so much more to our lives, to this existence, then material things. There is
much more to existence then the subjects of fixation by our limited physical senses. The
deeper one goes within. Within becomes beyond. We truly are strangers in a strange
land. Take a moment to wonder.






Overworked & Overwhelmed? Achieving Life Balance Amidst
    Chaos — By Shamelle, The Enhanced Life

Just as I stepped out to get some groceries this morning, I ran into one of my neighbors.
In an effort to be polite (and make conversation!), I asked the typical mundane question,
“How are you?”. I was expecting a “Fine thank you, how are you?” but his reply was far
from that! To my surprise, he sighed and answered, “Overworked & Overwhelmed”. As a
result, what seemed like a 5 minute door-step conversation, made it into a blog post!


The challenge of life balance in today's frenetically paced world is without question, one
of the most significant struggles faced by most of us. We are overwhelmed by the day-
to-day demands of our careers, families, constant tugging from cell phones, internet, a
sluggish economy etc.. We often feel there is not enough time in our lives to do the
things we need to do, let alone to do the things we want to do!


The meaning of life balance may vary for each individual, but one aspect most people
agree on is that life balance revolves around time. Guess what, I don’t agree with that
and I will tell you why.


Twenty four hours. No scientist or philosopher or great individual of the past has ever
gotten more! 24 hours... That’s all we get. No amount of wishing, complaining, or
creative time management will ever change that.


No matter how many personal productivity techniques we master, there will always be
more to do than we can ever accomplish in the time we have available to us, no matter
how much it is!


We’re too busy because we choose to be. It’s not really time management we should
be looking into. Even though much has been written about proper time management,
the advice is more focused on making more efficient use of time. Wake up early,
delegate, etc In fact, too much emphasis on time management makes one obsessive,


always watching the clock and thinking about what task is scheduled next.


So perhaps it makes more sense to give precedence to choice management over time
management?


Decide what comes first. Living a balanced life is about integrating components of
your life that are truly important to you and realizing that sometimes you need to make
choices about what has to come first.
For something that seems so self-evident to most people, it’s remarkable how many of
us struggle to put it to practice! Often, there is a myriad of excuses, the common one
being, “I am not disciplined enough.” Perhaps it’s not a discipline problem at all. The
problem is more often that the person has not yet sufficiently paid the price to get very
clear about what matters most to them. What do you think?


By choosing what comes first, sometimes there are sacrifices. But living a balanced life
doesn’t require you to give 100 percent of yourself 100 percent of the time. There will be
times when personal/family life and work collides but by knowing what’s really most
important to you and making choices based on this criterion, you’ll be better able to
balance your decisions.


Stay close to the shore with your commitments. People who are too nice rarely say
no. Faced with too many options and too much pressure, we respond with too many
“yes”s. Recognize that you don't have to agree to everything and with everyone. Use
your priority criteria to identify requests that simply aren't worth your time.


You become what you expect? We all go through life expecting certain things. Rather
than having more leisure time, we have less because we expect to do more and others
expect us to do more.






Finally…Finding a balance in your life is an ongoing process. Life is in a constant state
of change... a work in progress. Allow yourself the time to regularly reassess the
direction in which you are heading. Are you on track, or have you temporarily derailed?


I am iterating again... We’re too busy because we choose to be. What are your thoughts
on this?




Life Balance — By Ankur Garg, Excerpts From My Life

What is Life Balance? Why is it important?


Just like a balanced diet would mean some amount of pulses, cereals and other
nutritious items along with water in right quantity, and not just any one of them, a life
balance according to me is about right mix of work and non-work activities a person
should involve oneself. As the saying goes “Excess of everything is bad” delving too
much into one activity takes away one of the interest, efficiency, health or sometimes
even piece of mind. By doing other activities, one not only gets a change, but also
rejuvenates oneself for a better overall performance on other fronts.

Now, delving into other activities mean not just physically but mentally as well. Most of
the times we tend to be one-dimensional in the sense, chasing money and hence
devoting oneself too much in work or sometimes in the name of work-life balance, one
does involve in other stuff but is not completely there, while at work thinking of home,
while at a picnic thinking of work so on and so forth. Life balance is exactly not about
such a life.

Do everything that is important to you – could be as simple as going for a walk with your
kid or sitting a tad longer in your bath tub one hour and giving a critical presentation the
other hour in your office. Be your 100 percent wherever you are and whatever you are
doing.

What is life balance according to me?

Life balance for me would mean – Going for jogging in the morning with my wife,
sharing a little conversation with parents and other family members, reading newspaper
before I get ready for work, a peacefully taken breakfast (I mention this because I am
not able to practice this, often end up being hasty at this step) followed by my journey to
work. At workplace, along with work, I would like to be good with people I am
surrounded by, seeking the opportunity of socializing whenever I get a chance. Working
efficiently and not staying late is another thing I hold important. On my way home, would


love to listen to Jagjit Singh. Finally once back home, no work and only family. While
this defines a typical day, life balance would also mean occasional outings with friends
and family to places in and out of my city, to recreate, to rejuvenate. Oh I forgot my
visits to temple – simply love visiting Iskcon temples. To add to all this, spending time
with myself – simply sitting and a light meditation is on my cards.


Presently, quite a part of it is what I still haven’t incorporated for the reason I am a
single. I do find time for an early jogging a couple of times in week and also I make sure
I spend time with myself and with family members. As far as living every moment aware
of present, I try breathing techniques to get back to my calm self and channelize the
energies in my body.

What it means to me? Life balance is gaining more and more importance for me with
time. What a conventional effort at workplace does not fetch results, striking a balance
in life, a small and beautiful change in routine often comes along with solutions to
problems in life. It has also improved my efficiency over a period of time. So it has
become a part of living life.






These times we live in can bring out the best in us. Never in human history has the
opportunities been greater for us to realize our potential no matter what it is. We
have unlimited options, information and resources available to make what we want
happen. The full expression of who we are is best realized by attending to all aspects of
our life. This attention to all aspects is called living a balanced life. Here are the six
aspects of a balanced life and practices for growth:


1.   Mental – Our minds shape our experience of life. How we think about things, how
we talk to ourselves, cause us to be either satisfied with our lives or disappointed. A
healthy mind is one that is aware, thoughtful and open. The practice of mindfulness is a
powerful way to assure a positive mental state.


2.   Physical – Our bodies are an important part of the quality of life we live. A well
body eats healthy food, stays fit and gets enough rest. The body is the place of
feelings, of action, of health and energy. Illness can come from being out of balance.
The practice of walking in nature is great for the body and if you slow the walk down, at
times, it becomes a calming meditation.


3.   Emotional – We are emotional beings, we feel in response to our thoughts and
environment. Emotions are energy moving through our bodies, neither good nor bad
but simply us in relationship with the world around us. Our heart is our feeling center.
Loving is a wonderful practice of opening our heart and feeling our aliveness.


4.   Social – Humans are social animals that thrive on interactions. We live longer and
are happier in supportive relationships. We belong to social groups, churches,
organizations, and volunteer our time to be with others. We greatly value friendships
and count on them to center our lives. The practice of getting together to share a meal
and conversation is been around for a long time because it is so satisfying.




5.   Financial – We go to work to make money; to provide for ourselves and our family.
Working for others is often more secure. Working for ourselves can be challenging and
rewarding and has greater potential for financial freedom. A financial practice
encouraged by most every expert is to put at least 10% of your income into savings and
investments and over the long run you can create financial security.

6.   Spiritual- Each of us has a spirit/soul that is the life force that was here before we
came into this body and will be there after we pass on. This spirit is not member of any
religion but in union with the Source of all of creation. Nurturing your spirit is the
practice of listening to the quiet wisdom within and being guided by your higher self.


If each as these six aspects of our life is cared for and grown, we will feel our life is in
balance. The suggested practices for the different aspects are only one of many to
explore. The value of the practices is that they expand the possibilities within us
and serve as a reminder about the importance of living in balance. A balanced life is
truly one of joy and freedom.




Practicing Balance in Your Life
    — By Jenny Mannion, JennyMannion.com

I have to admit this one made me THINK REAL hard. Me, a recovering perfectionist,
mom of 2 kids ages 9 and 5, blogger with 2 blogs and an active Group Writing Project,
home owner, inventor actively working on my invention, friend, only child, wife,
daughter…. hmm how DO I practice balance and what DOES Life Balance mean to
me? Life Balance to me means KNOWING what is important to you in your life and
making sure that when you do those things you are present and doing them
consciously. If you do anything while your mind is somewhere else and keep coming
back to “what isn’t being done” you will feel like you are juggling while on a unicycle
instead of successfully balancing. Here are a few steps I use to maintain balance in my
life as well as a favorite animation that won the Oscar for Best Animated Short in 1990
called “Balance” which I immediately think of when I hear the word “balance”.

Pick THINGS you Love to DO.


I have so many things I enjoy doing and people I enjoy being with and am so very
grateful this is the case. If I allow myself to, I can become quite overwhelmed with what
HASN’T been tended to… instead it is important that WHEN I am doing something I get
the full enjoyment out of it. I love to dance, write, be with my friends and family, read,
take long walks, cross country ski, meditate, cook, work on my invention, network and
meet people, play games and to learn. If I tried to do ALL of these things daily I might go
out of my mind — (but I’d be happy while losing it)! I have a clear picture of the things I
enjoy most and keeping a picture of those things ensures it won’t be long before I do
each of them again.

I even have a hierarchy of sorts… I KNOW if I don’t go for a long walk for a few days my
body will be craving it and my mind just won’t work as well. Knowing this, KEEPS me
aware that every few days I need to take a nice long walk and be grateful while I am
doing it. If I am unfocused and “worrying about this or that” I will not come back having
appreciated the walk - but rather more frazzled - and what would be the point in that? I


balance the things I love to do by first KNOWING what it is I love to do most, being
conscious and grateful when I do these things and by not stressing about WHAT hasn’t
been done. If I take notice I haven’t done something like danced in a while I will set the
intention in my mind that I would like to go dancing soon.

Decide WHO You want to spend time with


I am very blessed and have many friends, family and people I have networked with that
I would LOVE to spend time with. Truth is I don’t get to physically see 80% of the people
I would love to regularly due to location but I try my best to keep in touch. I make sure
when I am spending time with a loved one I am spending conscious time with them. My
mom, my husband, my kids and my good friend Angela are people I never go a few
days without spending significant time with.


All of these people are inspirational to me and I love deeply. When you spend time with
loved ones are you sitting in front of the TV with them or are you emotionally
connecting? Are you consciously interacting and exchanging thoughts and feelings or
are you going through the motions and waiting to speak? Interaction with positive
people in your life is priceless. One never knows what the next day will bring. When you
are with someone — be with them and feel the connection you share. Even if you spend
every night with your spouse - if you are spending it in front of the TV and not
communicating it can leave you feeling disconnected and unbalanced in your
relationship. Conscious communication time is crucial for successful healthy
relationships.

I use this philosophy whether I am answering an email or looking into someone’s eyes
while speaking with them. Give the other person your full attention while interacting.
Stop that ego from interfering and really appreciate every interaction in your life. This
way you both get the maximum experience from interacting and you can learn along the
way. I love Wayne Dyer’s philosophy that he looks at every person he interacts with as
someone he is going to learn something from… when you start to look at people like
that you can’t help being filled with love and anticipation that something great will come
from that interaction. Whether it is a smile to a stranger or your undivided attention


when talking to a loved one — complete consciousness during the interaction will help
you feel balanced instead of feeling a lack of emotional connectivity.

Nourish Your Body, Mind and Soul


I feel part of the reason I had my diseases was my body’s way of saying “Hey! Wake
up! “Time to put yourself first — oh… you won’t okay — if you’re sick you’ll HAVE to put
yourself first!” As far back as I remember I was always described as “sweet” and “kind”.
My friend’s came to me for support whenever things didn’t go well or they needed an
ear. I am VERY happy to be that person as I truly love helping others but it got so bad I
was somewhere down near 10th on my list of people to tend to. I feel life is about
growing and learning and making a difference in other people’s lives. I feel in order to do
that you NEED to make sure you are in top shape physically and emotionally.

A question asked of me put this in crystal clear light… If a boat was sinking and you and
your husband and kids were all possibly going to drown — who would you rescue? My
first thought? Everyone else but myself! The response? How are you going to rescue
ANYONE else if you don’t make sure you are safe first? “A-Ha — I GOT it!”. If I am worn
down and exhausted from tending to everyone else I will have nothing to offer
ANYBODY.

I now KNOW it is important for me to nourish my mind with learning — luckily I can do
this as part of my “job description”. I need alone time to meditate or walk and just “be”…
yes, I will let my mind run rampant for a while but am sure to reign it in after a while and
also just take some deep cleansing breaths. The alone time is good for my soul and
good for me to connect with who I am deep inside rather than my roles of mom, wife,
etc…. I need to nourish my body with exercise, water and good food and to be
cognizant while doing this so my physical self appreciates it as well as my emotional
self. By being kind to myself I am ensuring I am physically and emotionally as healthy
as possible so I CAN help others when needed and have the energy to do it.

To have the energy to give out you need to be conscious about where your energy is
going and make sure you set aside time to ensure your wellness, health and happiness.
I know as a mom of two young children I was very apt to say “I have no time to care for


myself” but this is just making it so. There IS time if you prioritize and make sure YOU
have the energy needed to take care of yourself first –THEN you will have the energy to
offer other people. A good night’s sleep, the correct food, 5 minutes alone of meditation
time, doing things you love — all of these will contribute to you having energy for
yourself as well as for others. Having energy I feel is key to being balanced and
knowing you can tackle whatever needs to be done.


Do What You Love (Work)


When you work using your strengths not only are you nourishing your own soul but you
are bringing a great gift to the world. I love learning about personal development,
spirituality, the mind/body connection and healing. I love writing. I love networking and
being social with people. I LOVE the internet. It is because of these passions that
blogging and coaching are natural choices for me. Sometimes you have to “think
outside the box” a bit to find out HOW you can make money doing what you love. There
are many great posts I have found on this topic and here are a few to look at:

         “A Tested Guide to Transcending Your Fears and Finally Living Your Life’s
         Purpose” by Albert at The Urban Monk.


         Tom Volkar’s whole blog Delightful Work is devoted to showing you
         how to do what you love. Here is a good post to start out with “Is
         Your Work Delightful?”


         Steve Pavlina’s “How to Discover your Life’s Purpose in About 20 Minutes“.


The above three posts (and websites in general) are a great way to start discovering
your life’s purpose and beginning to think about HOW to grow that into what you do to
make a living. I guarantee there is a WAY to do what you love and make money at it!

When I “work” I am doing what I love. There are times when I am writing where I feel
like there is no thought involved…. call it what you want “being divinely guided”, “being
in the zone”…. when you do what you love for a living you will have many of these



moments and WOW is it an amazing feeling. The joy I get from writing and after posting
something I am proud of fills me with energy and leaves me feeling balanced and ready
to tackle something else.

The “To do’s”


Housework, laundry, car check-ups, groceries, chores, paying bills — ahh wouldn’t it be
nice to have one day a week to JUST do this stuff? Amid all the “work” and “play” time
there are the “I gottas” that come up. How do you balance all of this as well? Make lists,
delegate, out-source (if possible), break into smaller tasks and try and make them as
fun as possible. I am a master list maker — sometimes I joke that I need a list to keep
track of which lists I have. Keeping lists helps me to remember and keep clear in my
head what needs to get done as well as prioritize. For delegation — my husband and I
began chore charts for our kids which helps them gain responsibility and earn money
and gives us time to focus on other stuff. We sold our lawn tractor and out-sourced
mowing our yard because we realized it was less expensive to do it that way. I break
house cleaning into several tasks so I am not overwhelmed and feel I have to “do
everything at once”. When I have buckets of laundry to contend with I will blast music
that I love to get me moving and happy to have the opportunity to do it. Consciousness
is very important when doing these tasks as well. If I am thinking of something else and
not the task on hand it is very easy for me to get distracted and side-tracked. Staying
focused and aware of what you are doing gets the job done efficiently and lets you
move onto the next thing! Balance the “to-dos” in with things you love to do and people
you love to see and suddenly the “to-dos” just seem like a natural SMALL part of your
day.

Expect the Unexpected


As I was working on this post and wanting to get it done and posted — issues with my
car came up that needed to be tended to since we have an upcoming family trip. My first
reaction was sighing, “HOW will I ever finish?” and just general sadness because I
LOVE when I get the opportunity to be in the flow and write steadily without
interruption… this ensured I would not get that time in the next few hours. Life happens


and does not always go exactly the way you expect. If you keep this even in the back of
your mind and also put in there “everything happens for a reason” you will be better able
to deal with these incidents as they happen. If you huff, puff and get riled up about the
day being not what you wanted or get caught up in how “things didn’t work out” you are
not consciously in them moment and you are actually attracting more incidents or
craziness to begin. If you consciously acknowledge that the event happened you can
approach it thinking “ok — this is what is — I will deal with it, see if there is anything I
can learn by this happening and KNOW that I will have the time to do what I need to
do”. By saying this you are not resisting but allowing — you are consciously
“Appreciating all the Moments Not Just the Good Ones”. The event may still rock you a
bit but you will have still maintained balance and awareness and have not allowed the
“Pain Body” (as Ekhart Tolle would call it) to take over.

If I had stayed in my initial state of being sad and resisting instead of moving to
acceptance this post would not have gotten done and I would not have added this
section “Expect the Unexpected” which I feel IS very important in maintaining balance. I
also would have gone on my trip not knowing that my car just has a small issue that can
wait and wondering if it was okay with a car packed with my kids and “stuff”. Now I have
peace of mind the car will do great on the trip and I added an important part to this post
— hmm I guess everything DOES happen for a reason.

Summary


So what DOES life Balance Mean to me? Being conscious: during activities I love, while
interacting with people, while nourishing my mind, body and soul, while working and
doing my “to dos” and when unexpected things happen keeps me in balance. When I
get overwhelmed and start doing things unconsciously or “revert back to auto-pilot”
THAT is when feelings of being unbalanced set in. When that occurs I know I need to
take time to regroup, relax and possibly write a list about how to regain my balance and
sense of well being.




Life Balance: A Very Personal Pyramid
    — By Lance, Jungle of Life

         “Just as your car runs more smoothly and requires less energy
         to go faster and farther when the wheels are in perfect alignment,
         you perform better when your thoughts, feelings, emotions,
         goals, and values are in balance.” ~ Brian Tracy


How do we achieve balance in our lives? Many of us live in a life that is consumed by
more activities, more demands, more commitments. The one thing that hasn’t changed
is the amount of time we have. A day is still 24 hours long. A minute is still sixty
seconds in length.

We choose how we use that time. We choose what our focus will be.




If we think about life balance as a life balance pyramid, we’ll see that the pyramid is
made up of three distinct focus areas. Those areas are body, mind, and spirit.

Body is our physical body, and it’s needs. Mind is our mental/psychological/emotional
needs. Spirit is where we find deep meaning in our lives, the beliefs we have of a
higher power, or of something greater than ourselves.



Life balance is about balancing these three areas of our lives.

And we have to decide if the activities we are doing are in alignment with what this life
balance pyramid means to us individually. For instance, if you are sitting down to watch
your favorite television program, is this in alignment with your life balance pyramid?
The answer is “it depends”. It is if this is what you need to give your mind a rest, or if
this brings you relaxation. It is not, though, if you are doing this to avoid something else
that would bring you into balance, or if this becomes excessive, leaving you little time to
spend on other areas of your life.

While the base pyramid is the same for everyone, what really makes up these three
areas - what’s underneath the surface - is a very personal pyramid. Determining what
those things are that are underlying the main areas of body, mind, and spirit is a
personal journey into “you”. Looking at life balance without looking deeply at what
matters is what leads to balance that gets “out of whack”, balance that is jumbled up,
balance that is backwards. So, the key then, is finding what it is that is most important
in your life. And this requires a real look into ourselves, a deep introspection into who
we really are.

Balance doesn’t mean that we are always devoting equal time to each of these areas.
Balance means that we are aware of these areas, we are aware of their existence in our
lives, we are giving each area the necessary devotion so that we feel our lives are
balanced. Some days that will mean more emphasis on the needs of our body, other
days more focus will be on our spiritual needs, and yet other days focus will be on our
mind.

So, how does balance get backwards, or jumbled up? This happens when we are not
focusing on the real needs of our bodies, minds, and spirits. When we focus too much
of our time on activities that are not in alignment with what our body, mind, or spirit truly
call for. And when our balance gets jumbled up, that’s when we begin to lose focus.
That’s when we fall out of our element – out of what we were meant to do. We are
creatures created to have a life of abundance. When our lives are not in balance, true
abundance is missing.



A life of abundance and joy is possible. All it takes is balancing our body, mind, and
spirit needs. Take the time to really determine what this means for you, and then live
that out every day. Make each twenty four hour day of your life be in alignment with
what you desire. A life of balance is awaiting you!




The See Saw: a Metaphor for Life Balance
    — By Stacey Shipman, Let it Flow

There’s no secret to balance. You just have to feel the waves. - Frank Herbert

When I was a little girl, I loved playing on the see-saw– me on one end, my best friend
on the other. Up and down we moved, giggling playfully, hair blowing with every push off
the ground. We floated up and down with laughter and with ease.

Occasionally we attempted to balance the see saw. We had to find our place in the
center, face to face, feet not touching the ground. What a challenge to balance the see
saw! I cannot remember a time when we succeeded in finding balance. Frustrated, we
quickly gave up, happily returning to the ease of pushing each other up and down.

I see this as a wonderful metaphor for life balance for reasons that include:


Ups and Downs. Like the see saw, life comes with ups and downs –
happiness/sadness, busy times/slow times. I admit, I prefer happy over sad, but truth be
told both are a part of life. We have to experience and embrace the ups and the downs
instead of fight them. They aren’t going anywhere and often we cannot control them.
While the ups and downs can be bumpy, frustrating or fast moving, I find that when I
allow them to happen naturally I experience and enjoy life more. When I fight them, I’m
out of balance.


It’s fun for a while, but then I need a break. Although fun, we tired of the see saw and
needed a break. We engaged in a different activity, and eventually found our way back
to the see saw - maybe the same day, maybe the next. Much like certain aspects of my
life! As much as I love my work and my family, sometimes I need to step away in order
to clear my mind! The ups and downs of life can get tiresome – give yourself a (short)
break and re-energize. Take a vacation day, get out of the house, go to that yoga class -
do something different to refresh your body and your mind.





Let it flow. Trying to find balance on the see saw felt forced and frustrating, resulting in
a failed attempt at balance. Gently gliding up and down was so much easier and more
fun! In our lives we try so desperately to find balance, to gain control. In my experience
this need for control creates more tension, stress and imbalance. When I allow myself to
simply “let it flow” I am more at ease and fluid with my thoughts and actions. My body is
relaxed. My mind is calm. I’m making appropriate choices. Let go of control and let it
flow.


The Bottom line. For me, balance is allowing the ebb and flow of life to happen
naturally. I cannot control the ups and downs, but I can control my choices. Tuning in to
my physical, emotional and spiritual needs, rather than focusing on time spent on
certain activities, provides me the insight I need to make appropriate choices. When I
make choices that align with my goals and values, I am in balance. Some days I work
more than I play. But as long as that work is part of my overall plan, I am happy with that
decision. I am in balance. Focus less on balance and control and more on your choices,
and you may find that balance is closer than you think.




Emotional Balance — By Robin Birch, Let’s Live Forever

I thought I’d like to write about what emotional balance means to me. As I mentioned in
an earlier post Feelings Are There To Be Felt, I haven’t quite got emotions “worked out”.
But I’ve needed to focus on mine lots so I reckon I should really be an expert by now.
Ha.

In my younger days I was very withheld emotionally. No-one knew what I thought, or
how I felt. I didn’t know how I felt. At school I was very quiet and awkward, and didn’t
connect much. One time a group of kids made a list of everyone in the class, with a brief
description, to submit to the school magazine. For me they put “Silent Brain”. I misread
this and thought it said “Silent Drain”—I was extremely upset! (inside) (It didn’t make the
magazine.)

The only time I felt love was for the cat. I remember when I had my first boyfriend for 9
months when I was 18, I didn’t feel anything about him. I knew I liked him, I suppose,
but I was totally out of touch with any feelings of love or affection. He quite freely
expressed love for me, but I was just an emotionless blob. The poor guy! I did feel upset
after he broke up with me (after first finishing my exams), so I must have felt something.


I usually had one or two “best friends” at any time, but no more boyfriends, and
generally the trend of not being able to connect, and feeling isolated, strange and
different continued until I found the alternative healing world just before my 33rd
birthday (in 1986). Desperation drove me to it—something was not right and I knew that
at the rate I was going I would NEVER be happy.


Emotions and Connection


I started having rebirthing sessions, where you use breathing to allow feelings you didn’t
know you had flow through you. These days the process is often called breathwork or
conscious connected breathing, to avoid connotations of people trying to re-live their
birth (which I didn’t ever—not in an obvious way, anyway). I also started doing



workshops that removed blocks to feeling connected to others, and between the two
things, I began to connect with other people really well.

I started noticing and valuing my emotions… Ah Hah! Here comes an EMOTION! I’m
gonna let myself feel ANGRY! Or SAD! And I’m also going to ASSERT MYSELF,
because I CAN!

This lead to a phase I think many people might go through (I read in a book somewhere
that they do, anyway). That is… after learning to let some (or lots of) emotions express,
we may go overboard with them for a while, before coming into balance.

So at times I would stomp around being angry, or be very quick to yell at the driver who
had done me wrong on the roads. From rebirthing I knew how to breathe through
emotional episodes, so the emotion passes through pretty quickly and it doesn’t
become a wallowing session, and you are left feeling light and cleansed. I’m so grateful
I have that skill up my sleeve, and I have used it lots. But I didn’t always do it…
sometimes I preferred to be emotional.


Astrology


Years later, well into my 40s, I found myself turning to astrology for understanding. I was
living in a flat by myself, was not working much, had little money, and had become
isolated again (except when I did see someone occasionally, I connected with them
really well, heh heh). I should say here that I did some really good, creative,
performance-type work in this period… it was more that I was socially isolated. And I
was also very happy much of the time—but I knew there was more, and I had got to the
point where I was feeling that being over-emotional wasn’t serving me.


I came across Jan Spiller’s books ‘Astrology For The Soul’ and ‘Spiritual Astrology’.
What amazing books! I discovered that being over-emotional would indeed be my issue,
and they clearly described how to deal with all this in a way that made sense to me.


This totally changed things around for me—I had the books out from the library and I





kept renewing them and reading them again and again. Probably I had been so cut off
from my emotions when I was young because my emotions were so strong that I was
scared to feel them.


In these books, Jan discusses our past lives, and the path we are embarking on in this
life to bring things into balance. For example, according to this, I had lots of past lives
being at home and sheltered from the big, wide world in some way. My joy in this life
would be to get out into the world, and I would be successful when I did, but my
inclination might be to go with my past life pattern of staying at home. Also, people with
this pattern tend to be over-emotional… “These folks can be so overrun by their
emotions that they can’t think, they can’t function, and they don’t know why.”


She also describes how things can look when we have got to the point of really
integrating the energies and are functioning well. Something we can look forward to
when we have got things together. For my pattern it reads, in part:


You sense that your emotional fiber is actually not personal at all but rather your link
with the universe. As you listen to your emotional body, and allow it to be expressed
honestly and naturally, without censorship, in whatever environment you find yourself,
you restore a healthy emotional balance for those around you. Thus, giving your own
feelings a voice, expressing the subtle emotional undercurrents you sense going on
around you, clears the emotional atmosphere for everyone involved.


Sounds good!


Today I think I’ve got the flow of emotions thing working pretty well. I can let myself feel
them without being run by them. I’m still avoiding some of them though, which I know
because I have been overeating over the long, cold winter we have just had here in
Melbourne, with disastrous results for my waistline. But these days I know I feel love for
people and myself and everything, and Frank and I freely say we love each other.


PS - for any astrology buffs out there, I have Mars in Cancer, the moon’s North Node in


the 10th house and my pre-natal lunar eclipse in Leo in the 4th.




Teeter-Totter Tribulations
    — By Wendi Kelly, Life’s Little Inspirations

Sticky summer nights, the smell of Cracker Jacks and the drone of engines lined up like
soldiers in the Drive-in movie theater. This was the playground of my family’s Saturday
nights when I was a young girl growing up.


A picnic of sandwiches, chips and soda-pop preceded the moment that we children
considered the highlight of the evening, which was being allowed to escape the confines
of the family station wagon and fly off to play for a half hour on the playground dwarfed
by the giant screen above it.


It was a simple playground, not like the amusement park replicas our children play on
today. It had a metal slide, tall with a wave in the middle, which we would cleverly slide
over with a slice of our mother’s wax paper to make it far more slippery than any mother
now would consider safe. It had a Merry-go-round, a cylinder disc with curved bars to
hold on to- while some energetic child would hold on and run circles on the ground and
teach us what could happen to children who didn’t hold on tight in this world.


The most unique piece of equipment was the giant drum. All of the kids would cram into
the drum like rats in a sewer and we would lean to one side as the drum began to move.
The more we pushed, the faster it went until the force of our actions caused it to move
with great speed and we all went tumbling over one and another into a screaming,
laughing heap. Some of the kids would get scared and get out. Some of the kids would
scream to go faster. Someone ALWAYS got hurt. It was inevitable. It was usually my
sister. It was a blast.


When my crazy (fearless) sister wasn’t commandeering the drum, she was likely to
found swinging from the top of good old-fashioned Monkey Bars. While more sedate
and cautious children, like me, were down below examining the risks, she was
shimmying up the poles, one hand after the other, climbing over slower, more hesitant


children, rushing to the top. Every now and then, she would fall off. Once in awhile she
would sprain or twist a body part, but she would dust herself off, find another way up
and try another route, and before long there she would be again, calling for me to join
her from the top…the highest Monkey in the land.


My personal favorite piece of equipment was the Teeter-Totter. I was always trying to
get someone to go on the teeter-totter with me. I was fascinated by the concept of it.
The fact that you couldn’t go on the Teeter-totter by yourself and have it DO anything
was both a marvel and an annoyance that I couldn’t get over. I wasn’t satisfied to
continue going up and down, up and down, up and down on the thing. I wanted to play
on the Teeter-Totter for the same reason I kept jumping out of trees. I wanted to do the
impossible. I wanted to fly- and I wanted the teeter-totter to stay suspended in perpetual
balance up in the air.


The fact that I was a complete failure at this experiment-at least for more than a mere
second or two at a time- never seemed to faze my cohorts or me. We would try,
repeatedly, to get just the right momentum going, just the right balance, to get those
both sides to match and stay suspended in space…before one side or the other would
fall and we would dissolve into a fresh fit of laughter.
The signaling glow of the lightning bugs would always end our playground follies and
bring us back to the movie portion of the evening. In looking back, I can’t name more
than a few movies my family watched together on those mosquito nights with the
scratchy little speakers pumping the sound inside our cramped car. But I do think about
the lessons learned on the playground out there. The life lessons I learned by playing
on “dangerous” paint-chipped equipment, which society put away long ago.


Power of Wax Paper. With a little wax paper, we can speed things up. If things are
going a bit too slow or are problematic and not to our liking, we do have some
control over the outcome. We can think it through, problem solve, come up with a
solution and bring our own solution to the table (or slide) and not be a victim of a slow
slide. We have the power to make change happen.





Truth about the Spin Cycle. The world is spinning FAST. It isn’t going to slow down for
you to catch your breath, no matter how much you wish it would. If you let go, you may
spin out into orbit and get conked on the head or get a fat lip. It’s your job to HOLD ON
TIGHT. That doesn’t mean you always have to have a vice grip on it either. You can hold
on and scream your head off or you can hold on, laugh your head off, and have fun. You
are still in control. But YOU CAN’T LET GO.


Teamwork Turns the Drum. As long as we all worked together to keep the giant drum
turning, it didn’t matter if we went fast, slow or in-between. It only mattered that we
communicated and worked together. Then we could have fun. As soon as everyone only
started thinking for themselves, people fell over, got trampled and got hurt.


Falling isn’t Failure. My sister wasn’t failing every time she fell off of the Monkey bars.
She was learning a better, faster way to shimmy up to the top. Soon, there wasn’t a kid
from miles around who could climb up there faster than she could. The rest of us were
still trying to figure things out from down below, staring up. Rarely do we learn looking
up, we learn looking down at where we’ve been.


Life’s a Teeter Totter. The bad, really sad news is that life isn’t going to balance. Our
teeter-totters, balls, balloons, marbles or anything else we try to juggle and toss up
there aren’t going to stay suspended in perfectly balanced animation NO MATTER
HOW HARD we try, and no matter how hard we WISH, or VISUALIZE them too.


Remembering that Life is a Teeter-Totter, we realize that we aren’t playing out here all
alone. Many of us have trouble balancing our lives because we try to do it in a vacuum-
and then are surprised when Life and people get in the way. We design the perfect
balance plan and someone walks in with an important need and hand-grenades our
strategy to bits. Their turn up, our turn down. We must ALSO build in times for our turn
at UP. Because if we don’t…it might not come. We have to bring our own wax paper and
make things happen for ourselves. We can’t wait for it. We need to start now. We can



also shoot for those rare moments of middle ground. Just don’t expect them to be the
norm.


Remembering that life is a teeter-totter, we realize that just because we haven’t
achieved the perfect Zen of life balance doesn’t mean we are failing. It means we are
learning. We are growing new ideas and expanding our understanding about who we
are as authentic human beings in communion with other authentic human beings.
Sometimes we get caught up in feeling as if we are the only ones in the spin cycle. Not
true. We are all in the Drum together and we can keep it turning through better
communication, compassion and teamwork. Teamwork keeps us from tripping over
each other. TRUE LIFE BALANCE comes as we grow as individuals and in community
with each other.


You can’t ride the Teeter-Totter alone.






Finding Balance Between Creativity and Family
    — By Lisa Leonard, Lisa Leonard Online

For me, the drive to create isn’t optional. Ideas swim around in my mind, run through
my veins and keep me up at night. I am driven to express myself through creativity. I
have a creative business that requires me to work every day. But even if I didn’t have a
business, I know I would be focusing more creative energy on decorating,
entertaining…something!


So the question isn’t, ‘Should I create?’ but, ‘How can I balance my need to create
with my need to take care of my family?’ This is an ongoing process for me, one that
I am sure a lot of moms can relate to. Here are some small tips on what works for me.

Take Breaks


I plan on taking lots of breaks. I get lots of work done while the boys are at school or
after they are in bed, but there are times I need to work while they are home and
awake. I try to gear up for interruptions. One will need juice; another will need a diaper
change. I don’t mind asking them to wait for a couple minutes, but their needs come
first and small interruptions should be expected!

Stay On Top of Your Workload


I try to stay on top of my emails and projects. I am not always successful, but when I
fall behind I find myself more stressed. It is worth it for me to stay up half an hour later
and finish my to-do list for the day.

Be Realistic


Speaking of to-do lists, I try to keep mine realistic. I have begun to realize that the day
only holds 24 hours (shocking, I know!) and only so much can be accomplished. That’s
OK, there is always tomorrow and another set of tasks to be accomplished.





Make Time for Fun


I find that we often have to get out of the house to have focused fun time. Even a trip to
the grocery store can be a treat! Each child gets to choose a special snack. Stickers
and balloons wait at the check stand. It’s time to focus on the boys and talk with them.
Of course, we also do kid things like a trip to the park, pumpkin patch or a play date with
friends. We make time for fun every day.

Get Help


I remember clearly the day when I realized I was in over my head. I had a meltdown
and felt completely overwhelmed. It was a turning point for us as a family. It made
sense to hire someone to help with packing and shipping. I was spending hours every
week doing a task that I could have someone else do. This freed me up to have more
time with my family and more creative energy to put into the business.

Don’t Wish the Time Away


Our kids are only young once… Soak up the days and enjoy them. I try to treasure
our moments together and, as much as I can, I let them be a part of my work.

How do you find balance between creativity and family?




Life Balance and Stress — By Rob McPhillips,
    Life Without Conflict

Every now and then I start to read a book or go looking around the web to see what
other people are writing about. When I do this I often start a rant and I have a post or
two pretty much written.

Anyway while I was looking about I came across a post about Life Balance. It turned out
that it was a series of different people sharing their views on leading a balanced Life.
Now this is a topic that I have long held strong views on. Many people feel they need
life balance to reduce stress. So I thought I’d join in and share my opinion.

Back a few years ago I looked into Coaching and lurked in a few online Communities.
One of the things that I disliked about that field was the lack of original thought. They
were always banging on about being noticed and respected as a profession. They
wanted to be respected to overcome their own doubts and validate their work. They
had this new idea that could be developed in a hundred different ways and instead they
wanted to be taught the ‘one right way’.

One of the ways this was exhibited was that obviously in their training they were taught
something called the wheel of life.

You might have come across it. Basically they divide life up into compartments, work,
family, health etc and rate each area. The idea is that if you’re 3 in finances and a 9 in
relationships you need to focus on improving your financial situation.

You can see the logic in it, can’t you?

In some ways it’s a great tool to quickly scan your life. But problems always come when
people elevate tools, technology, processes and organizations to a higher status than
people. Life is about people. The rest of it only exists to serve people.




I agree that balance is essential. In life we need to exert ourselves and we need to
relax. We need to succeed and we need to fail. We need to inhale and we need to
exhale. There is a yin and a yang. A rhythm to life, just as there is a rhythm to walking.

But the problem comes from the assumption that we understand the technical details of
all the aspects you need in your life.

I can’t be certain, but I’m pretty sure Jesus never sat down with a wheel of life
despairing the imbalance between what he lived and what someone else said should be
in his life. You can just imagine him gathering the Disciples together and saying;

‘Listen, I think we’ve overdone it a bit on the God’s plan thing. All well and good, but we
need a few women and children to bring us into balance. And we need to get ourselves
some hobbies. Maybe go bowling.’

I shouldn’t think Buddha sat under the Bodhi tree regretting his broken marriage and
lack of finances. Yet he did come to balance.

First he rejected his privileged upbringing and took up extreme poverty. But he realized
that you don’t get spiritual wealth, just because you reject material wealth. He came to
realize that the middle way, balance was the path to enlightenment.

You see balance is essential to life. Just as walking is a feat of balance.

But you don’t get to walk with perfect balance by researching books and trying to put
60% balance on your right foot, then shifting 15% this way, do you?

You learned to walk by feeling your way into balance. Gradually you became aware of
your centre of gravity without even realizing what it was. Just an internal sense that you
needed to shift weight to one side.

People with great balance, like Sports stars have a refined awareness of their centre of
gravity. They know when they’re out of balance before the effects show up in their
actions. So they correct it quickly before it harms them.

When you actually analyze walking, as some people have, it’s really controlled falling.
90% of the time you are out of control. But what stops you falling is the ability to


quickly recover and bring yourself back into balance. And that’s true of every natural
occurrence. Nothing living is ever perfectly controlled.

Life is chaos. Just as it seems we’re about to fall, about to destroy the planet, about to
go into financial meltdown we find our centre of gravity and steer ourselves back to
safety.

You cannot ever eliminate stress, but you can get so good at dealing with stress that it
never grips you enough to harm you.

We live for the thrill of living, not for the safety and security and long slow death of
technical perfection. We are Artists of living a rollercoaster Life. We only want balance
when we have gotten too far out of whack and we hurt.

So let’s bring this ramble to a conclusion that makes some sense to someone who feels
that they need balance.

The balance that you seek is not one of technical details or mathematical equations.
The balance comes from an inner awareness, an inner guidance that leads you to the
joy and bliss that we all seek to experience.

Balance is something that we need, but the wheel of life approach looks at it from a
perspective that will not bring it. It is a slightly more complex step from the idea that
money brings happiness. Instead adding in other elements such as relationships,
career and health.

The truth is no possession or quality will bring you happiness. You can only be happy,
by being you.

And so the more fully you, you are, the more you will express that in every area of your
life.

You see, you are the central theme, the grand idea that connects all the compartments
of your life together. Each of us is designed uniquely. Some don’t have any need for
family. Others have little need for work. Or for money. Or whatever. Just find your




emotional centre of gravity and use your awareness to continually bring it back into
balance.






Awakening To a Balance Life — By Davina, Loving Pulse

While I waited for my senses to surrender to sleep, I listened to the wind
whispering through the trees outside my window.

I felt connected. Complete. I drifted off to sleep while other senses were awakened.

The wind was the last thing I remembered before waking from a dream. In this dream I
was dressed in army fatigues and being held prisoner. I was not alone and eventually
helped the other person to escape.

I awoke from the dream slowly, still looking through the eyes of that person who had
remained behind. Interestingly that person no longer felt like a prisoner.

I had this dream while preparing to write this article and feeling the frustration of writer’s
block. How could I write about living a balanced life when I was struggling with it
myself? Nothing I wrote felt right. I had become so attached to the outcome of the article
I wasn’t letting the creativity flow. I was disconnected. What was interesting about this
dream was my interpretation. The person who had been set free was my creative muse.

My thoughts returned to the connection I had felt while listening to the wind. I knew
there was an answer there. Memories of other times I felt connected swam through my
mind and I relaxed into knowing what living a balanced life meant to me.

Seeing a shooting star. Catching a snowflake. Watching the sunrise on a misty morning.
Admiring a rainbow. Smelling the new cherry blossoms in springtime.

These are things that fill me up. They are without expectation. And because I am
not attached to the outcome I can be more fully in the moment. Nature does that
for me. It wakes me up. It inspires that feeling of being connected. When I feel
connected I also feel balanced.

We have become separated from the natural flow of life in an effort to control it.
Calendars and schedules attempt to balance our daily activities, yet we still run in
circles seemingly getting nowhere. We have created this world and yet it controls us.



We are out of rhythm and less flexible because we depend on these schedules to tell us
where to be and when.

Life has a schedule of its own and it unfolds as we are trying to fold it up, throw it into a
briefcase and run for the next subway train. We don’t even see where we’re running
because subconsciously we’ve already reached our destination.

Because we have become so disconnected with our natural rhythm we feel unfulfilled.
This brings an unconscious desire to fill a void. And fill it we do – with things. But it’s
never enough is it?

Trouble is, the more things we collect the more complicated our lives become and the
more out of control we feel. It is a never-ending cycle.

You can stop the cycle. Here are five suggestions.

1. Feel your connection: Balance is achieved through connection. What are you doing
when you feel connected? See it in your mind and remember how it feels. When you
feel out of control, revisiting this feeling can stop you from living ahead of yourself. It
brings you back into the moment. When you are in the moment you are less likely to be
distracted.

2. Honour your values: When you know what your ultimate goal is (the big picture),
hold it in your intent but don’t become attached to it. Working with values gives a person
the ability to make more powerful and appropriate choices about how to reach their
goal.

Finding rhythm in attaining a goal comes through knowing that each step is connected
to the other; like a dance. They’re not separate actions to be scheduled in a specific
order. They naturally support and feed each other with little effort. One clue that you are
not honouring your values is through your internal dialogue. See #3.

3. Choose your dialogue: Be aware of how you talk and think. What words are you
choosing? When you say, “I should” or “I have to” you are putting pressure on yourself.
Or, perhaps what you are trying to accomplish is not of value to you and you shouldn’t




waste your time on it. If it is important, choose more empowering words such as “I want
to” or “I will”. They’re less likely to cause resistance to action.

4. Practice meditation: Simply put, meditation encourages clarity. We aren’t scattered
because there are too many distractions. It’s because we are not focused that we notice
the distractions. When a person is not focused they are more vulnerable to outside
influences. Responding to people and circumstances takes a back seat, while reacting
takes the front.

5. Focus on fulfillment: Fulfillment surrenders to balance. As I mentioned earlier, when
we are not feeling fulfilled we unconsciously try to fill a void with things we believe will fill
us up. When a life is built on false beliefs any perceived balance is fragile and short-
lived. I’ve had days where my life seems as organized as it can be, but find myself
feeling restless. Something is missing. Things appear to be balanced, but I’m not
fulfilled.

One thing to remember. If you’ve ever tried to stand on one leg you’ve noticed that
balance fluctuates. That means if you aren’t flexible you’ll end up a prisoner of your own
controlled efforts.

Wake up to your senses and they will lead you to the fulfillment that designs a
balanced life.




Work. Life. It’s All About Living — By Maria Gajewski,
       Never The Same River Twice

Work life balance is one of the most overused phrases of the last 10 years. And what
good has all the talk done you?

If you’re like most people, your 9-5 turns into a 9-9 more often than not. You’re bringing
work home on the weekends, missing time with your children, and haven’t practiced
your hobby in years. Your waistline is expanding while your sense of well-being is
shrinking.

When Stacy at Create a Balance announced the Life Balance Group Writing Project, I
was initially a little put off. I mean, honestly, the whole work life balance thing has been
talked (and written) about to death. However, I kept thinking about the idea and realized
why I’m so frustrated with the whole subject. I think most people are approaching the
idea all wrong…

What is Work?

Maybe my entire problem with the concept of work life balance is one of definition. I
decided to turn to Google to help me find a definition that resonated with me. Here is
just a small sampling of what I found.

  •     Exert oneself by doing mental or physical work for a purpose or out of
        necessity

   •    Have an effect or outcome; often the one desired or expected

   •    Proceed towards a goal or along a path or through an activity

   •    Employment: the occupation for which you are paid




These are all functional definitions of the word “work”, but none of them really got at the
heart of what I think of when I see that word. Here’s my definition:

         Work = All the Stuff You (Think You) Have to Do, But Don’t Want
         to Do


The Status Quo is Broken

Most people (including me) spend a lot of time doing things that they don’t want to do.
We go to jobs that may be “okay” but we aren’t passionate about. We go to parties that
we don’t enjoy, talk to people that we don’t like, shop for clothes that we don’t want to
wear, and clean things that we don’t want to use. Doing all of these things leaves
precious little time for the fun stuff that may look like work to someone else (knitting - I
just don’t get it), but that we enjoy so much we do it for free.

The current status quo in the United States and other Western countries (but not
France, God bless ‘em!) is to do lots of work and to feel good about yourself because of
it. Personally, I blame the Puritans for this and all other social ills currently afflicting the
U.S., but the source of the problem isn’t important. What matters is that we - the
intelligent, tired, and bored people of the world - find ways to circumvent this system
and actually have time to enjoy our own lives. If others want to keep on working away, I
certainly won’t try to stop them!

How to Work Less and Have More Life

Now that we’ve defined the problem, the question becomes one of execution. Given that
we all have certain constraints (like the need to eat on a daily basis), we can’t just walk
away from all work. But, as far as I can tell, the only way to increase your work life
balance is to spend less time working (doing things you don’t like) and more time living
(enjoying yourself and your friends/family). So, right now, I want you to pull out a piece
of paper and draw a line down the middle of it. On one side, make a list of all the things
that you do that you consider work. On the other side, make a list of all the things that
you consider life.




Just so we’re clear, for the purposes of this exercise work is always bad and life is
always good. I know that reality isn’t all neat like this, but humor me for a minute.

Because time is a non-renewable resource, if you want to do more of one thing you
have to stop doing so much of another. That means you’re going to have to find time
you can shift from the work column over to the life column. I’ve been actively engaged in
this process for a couple of years now, and here are a few lessons I’ve learned the hard
way, so that you don’t have to.

  1.   Quit Stuff. I know this is hard and often frowned upon, but you really can quit
  obligations that are taking away your time and attention from things that you enjoy.
  Resign from the PTA board, stop showing up for that yoga class that gives you a
  backache, just say “No” to dinner parties. Quit anything that makes you say “Ugh,”
  when you think about going.


  2.   Don’t Go Above and Beyond. Don’t tell your boss I said this, but it rarely
  pays to be a top tier employee. Let’s say that your employer ties raises to
  performance. If you’re average you get a 2% raise and if you’re exceptional you
  get 5%. If you make $50,000 per year, being exceptional earns you $1500 (before
  taxes) more than your average colleague. How many additional hours would you
  need to work to get that $1500? If it’s just 15 minutes per day (and it’s probably a
  lot more than that!), you are working 60 hours per year - more than 1 extra week -
  for that money. Is it worth it?

  3.   Find Someone Else to Do Your Work. Not all work activities are job related.
  We all have tasks that are necessary to maintain life (most of these can be labeled
  “chores”) but aren’t any fun. The good news is, other people do these things in
  exchange for money or some other item of value. So if you love to mow your lawn,
  but HATE scrubbing the bathtub, hire a cleaner. (I’ve done this myself.) I know that
  you have lots of reasons to avoid doing this. You think it’s expensive (it’s cheaper
  than your fancy car payment). You’ll feel guilty (yep, but you’ll get over it). Your
  mother will find out (she will, and she’ll get over it too). Trust me, the cost is well




  worth the time it buys you. If all else fails, make your kids help with the cleaning.


  4.   Sign Up and Pay Money. If you really want to start an activity that falls in the
  life column, the surest way to get going is to sign yourself up for something that
  costs money. This can be a class, contest, race, trip, or anything with a set
  deadline. Human psychology will force you get the most out of your investment
  and you’ll find ways to do the three tips above. The best part is, you’ll have fun
  doing it.


I know that we’re all struggling to live more balanced lives.




It’s Never Too Late — By Prem Rao, People at Work & Play

I wonder if you noticed that evenings at an executive retreat tend to lend themselves to
nostalgia. The day’s work is done and as you sit and yarn, sooner or later someone in
the group speaks of old times. This happens with unfailing regularity. You hear happy
stories and sad ones- from the past. They could cover virtually anything- a childhood
memory, an opportunity gone by, the amazingly low costs of those days or simply about
things that you wish you had done - but couldn’t , or more often than not, didn’t.

A constant theme I hear is that we wish we could have spent more time with the family.
Spent more time with our children when they were growing up -and perhaps needed us
the most. And in pursuing interests which we can’t do now- for reasons of health or
affordability. Some comments that one hears quite frequently:-

         “I had such wonderful opportunities to play squash -but didn’t.
         It’s forbiddingly expensive now”.

         “We lived in the mountains when I was much younger. I kept
         putting off climbing those peaks. Now they are beyond me”

         ” I could have learnt that years ago but was busy with other
         things. I now find it almost impossible to understand. Things
         have changed so much”.

         “Watching other’s children grow reminds me of my own kids. I
         didn’t have much time for them then. I have all the time now, but
         they are no longer around”


The bad news is that all of us have something to repent about. The good news is that
it’s never too late to repent. You might not be able to do one thing that you missed- but
you could quite easily immerse yourself in another which gives you that much joy-
provided you give that activity the priority, it deserves.

I guess as you grow older things take on differing degrees of importance. In youth, you
would seldom care about your health. With the major focus on work, it was inevitable


that you pretty much took good health for granted. Something that you cannot afford to
do as you get older. Likewise, for the younger person with less family responsibilities,
the ability to take more risks ( be it for a career change or moving to a different
environment altogether) is much higher than an older person who has more
responsibilities - with less time on his side.

At the end of the day, we live life based on the choices we make and the priorities we
assign. There is hope for us yet. Dennis Waitely, whom I admire as a writer, sums it up
so well:

           ” Time is an equal opportunity employer. Each human being has
           exactly the same number of hours and minutes every day. Rich
           people can’t buy more hours. Scientists can’t invent new
           minutes. And you can’t save time to spend it on another day.
           Even so, time is amazingly fair and forgiving. No matter how
           much time you have wasted in the past, you still have an entire
           tomorrow”.


People who live truly fulfilling lives make time for everything that is meaningful to them.
This includes work, leisure, health and family. A balanced lifestyle is not based on a
mathematical equation. What matters is not the amount of - but the quality of - time you
spend on all that’s important to you.

.




Reach for Life Balance — By BC Doan, Reach Beyond Limits

I have always tried to find ways to balance my life, whether it is work, home, or my own
responsibilities. We all have so many roles to fill, from being a parent, a daughter/son, a
sister/brother, a friend, to being an employee.

Each role we play has its own hiccups. We learn to weave out the good and the bad,
and then somehow try to find balance in order for us to be able to live with.

So What is Life Balance?

This is a tough question! I know what I want, and I know what works for me, but to give
it a definition, I have to dig deeper. For me, life is balance when gives and takes, yes
and no, happiness and sadness, meet somewhere close to the middle.

Why Do You Need Life Balance?

I need life balance to be a better person. Without balance, life would be a total chaos in
all aspects of my human being. My emotional will be drained. My physical will be
vulnerable to illness. My mental stage will be depleted.

How I Practice Life Balance

I practice life balance by paying attention to my own being, listen to what my body tells
me, and do something that I love. For example, I give all my energy in taking care of my
children, and when that energy runs low, I give myself permission to soak in a hot bath,
without guilt. When my body is tired, I take ten minutes for a short nap.




What I Incorporate Into Life Balance?

      •     Love oneself

      •     Love others

      •     Accepting life as is

      •     Having faith

      •     Do one thing that I like every day

      •     Eating healthy foods

      •     Learn something new every day

      •     Reach beyond limitations

      •     Take time to count my blessings

      •     Develop appreciation for people and things around me

What are the Characteristics of Someone Practicing the Art of Life Balance?

      •     Calmness

      •     Easy going with a touch of happiness

      •     See the difference between big problem, and small one

      •     Accepting one's own situation, and find contentment from it

      •     Flexible in dealing with the unexpected

      •     Take life as it is, and try to make it better




The Essential Components of Life Balance

The essential components of life balance include: prioritize, discipline, scheduling, self-
forgiving, contentment, happiness, giving yourself a pat on the back, be gentle with
inner critic, and have compassion.



What Does Life Balance Mean to You?

Having life balance prevents me from burning out, preserve the person that I am, and
enable me to embrace all living things around me. I can give myself freely, but also be
selfish when needed too.



This is what life balance means to me! It is not perfect, but I am working on it every day.
Life is constantly changing, even from day to day; therefore, I must also learn to go with
the changes rather than against them.




What Is Life Balance & Is It Achievable For Everyone?
    — By Kelly Rigby, She-Power

When Stacey of Create a Balance posted about her life balance group writing
project, my first thought was “great idea, shame I know absolutely nothing about life
balance.”


I said as much to Stacey, but she convinced me to try and put my own spin on the topic,
particularly since I struggle so much with it. And what a struggle it’s been. In truth, until
very, very recently, I would have told you I have no idea what life balance is.

None. I’m not exaggerating.

For this reason I decided to consult a book by Paul Wilson, who is often cited as the
Guru of Calm. In Perfect Balance: Create Time and Space for All Parts of Your Life
, Paul defines PERFECT BALANCE as

         The “feeling of everything being just right and making sense,
         when you perform at your best and most productive without
         stress or distraction, when you are motivated and inspired, when
         you can relax and enjoy the company of others, when you have
         all the time in the world…”


I read that and my first thought is, “Does anyone feel this way?” Because I certainly
never have.

For as long as I can remember I have been one of those people who throws herself
from one extreme to the other. When I was younger it was 12 hour days as a product
manager balanced with boozing, popping pills and snorting coke until I didn’t know
whether I was waking up or going to bed.

Then I spent years where I achieved some real meaning in my life, but there was still no
balance. I was either: working, studying and saving; or taking off backpacking for 5-6



months. This usually involved lying around on beaches, drinking beer, meeting new
friends and exploring temples and markets. After recharging my batteries, I’d inevitably
return home and start the treadmill all over again.

I guess there is a kind of balance in this; a SEE-SAW EFFECT. But when I was in work
mode my most common feeling was exhaustion, which is hardly a sustainable state.

Trying To Be The Perfect Mother Reduced My Life Balance To An All-Time Low


At 32, after years of this tiring, but at times exhilarating SEE-SAW, I embarked on what
would become the most unbalanced phase of my life. Motherhood. For the first time I
went from being a die-hard independent; a woman who had been completely self-
driven for 14 years, to a woman who gave up everything to raise my son.

Yes, EVERYTHING. All exercise, self care, my job, my own money, my LIFE outside of
Bunny.

I was so determined to be the PERFECT MOTHER. To get everything “right”. To be
there for every second of my son’s life. To have him know he was my top priority; the
one person he could always count on.

To me, being a good mother meant sacrifice. Lots and lots of sacrifice.

If you’re thinking there’s a happy ending here and I’m going to deliver a bullet point list
of how I turned my life around in 10 easy steps, well you’re going to be disappointed. I
do see the error of my ways and I now understand that HAPPY MOMMY = HAPPY
CHILD. But to say, I’ve got it all worked out, that would be overly optimistic.

Is Life Balance Achievable?


This group writing project has come at an interesting time because I have been
consumed in recent months with the need to balance my responsibilities to others with
my responsibilities to myself.

It has been an at times heart wrenching struggle as I have questioned whether I am
even cut out for motherhood. I have so many personal ambitions and a free spirit that


does not like to be confined. How do I reconcile this with my current responsibilities and
the needs of the family I adore?

I have asked myself many times what I really want out of life and so far my ideal
picture of life balance involves:

            •My time being evenly split between work/projects that are
                creatively fulfilling and spending quality time with my child

            •Having satisfying relationships while also taking quiet time
                to continue with my personal development and spiritual
                studies, or just do nothing and recharge

            •To have some financial security balanced with a high degree
                of freedom and a respect for my adventurous spirit

            •To live mostly in a state of inner peace


            •To spend more time in the present and enjoying my
                physicality and less time in my head


When I read those words, I can’t help but think I’m searching for nirvana. Doesn’t
everyone want this kind of life, and realistically how many of us are going to get it? I
have considered the notion that maybe the SEE-SAW is the best I can hope for. Maybe
I’m just built this way - a woman of extremes.

But then I started reading Perfect Balance: Create Time and Space for All Parts of
Your Life and two of Paul Wilson’s quotes leaped out at me:



         “Everything you need for a perfectly balanced life you already
         have. There’s nothing new you need, there’s nothing you have to
         give up. All you have to do is rediscover and refocus the
         strengths you have now.”




          “Your life will be as balanced as you make up your mind for it to
          be.”


Aha - LIGHT BULB MOMENT. In an instant I understood where I have been going
wrong.

Achieving life balance is about making MORE than just physical changes


Too often people associate life balance with a more productive combination of work,
family, spiritual and social needs. They caught up in thinking about the physical changes
needed to improve their lives. But what about the internal changes?

Life Balance is MORE than Productivity and Goal Setting and “Doing What You
Love”

Meaningful life balance starts with CHOICES. With seeing that you are not a victim of
circumstance. You choose how to spend your time, so before you start moving the
pieces of your life, ask yourself:

   •    What choices are you currently making? Where are your energies currently
        focused?

   •    Are these choices in line with your values and priorities?

   •    Where do you WANT to spend your time and focus your energies?

   •    Can you choose to look at your life differently, see all that’s right and feel
        good about it NOW?

I’m still moving these ideas around in my head, but straight away I can see that my
attitude to my life is my biggest problem. I tend to wish I had the freedom of
someone who doesn’t have children and I get stuck on the restrictions that come with
motherhood. I want to be able to travel and concentrate on my writing like I could “in the
good old days”.




But what’s the point of thinking this way? I AM a mother. I AM a wife. I’m GLAD I made
BOTH these choices, and I have never regretted them. I envy aspects of my husband’s
career driven life, but when it comes down to it, I wouldn’t swap with him and miss out
on the bond I have with Bunny. And if I could go back and do my life over, I wouldn’t
choose to be anywhere different now.

So, starting today I’m going to get real about my life. I am a mother of a young son and
he needs me. I’m happy he needs me. This means some of my personal goals will have
to take a backseat sometimes, and life will flow a lot smoother if I don’t expend energy
resisting that.

I guess the lesson is that life balance is an ever changing puzzle. Priorities today will not
necessarily be the same a year from now, so I should try going with the flow more and
judging myself less. I can only do the best that I can, and for once maybe I should tell
myself that my best is good enough.

How successful do you think you are with life balance? Are you happy with your
choices? If not - is it your priorities that need to change or your attitude?





Live Simple To Create Balance In Your Life
       — By Jack Rugile, Simple Sapien

Balance is an essential component of happiness. When all aspects of your life are in
harmony, it puts your mind, body, and spirit on an equal level. The definition of balance
will be completely different from person to person. It is up to you to find the balance that
is right for you. However, living simple will always help you create balance in your life.

Many of us have lives that are like a person attempting to walk a tight rope for the first
time. We buckle. We wobble. We try to stay on by flailing our arms. But eventually, no
matter how hard we try, we fall off the edge.

Some of us will give up. Some of us will get back on the tight rope and try again. Some
of us will find a whole new way to balance. Those of us who find a new way to balance
our like people riding bicycles. The balance is tricky at first, but once you get some
speed and gain momentum, it is completely natural to stay in balance. Living a
simple life is like riding that bicycle. It does not guarantee that we won’t ever fall off, but
it greatly increases our chances of staying in balance.

Finding balance in your life can be a difficult thing. It most certainly will not happen
overnight. There will be many hours of contemplation, reflection, imagination,
frustration, and inspiration involved in the process. And even if you do find balance in
your life, that balance may morph and change as your life changes. Things that are
important to you now may mean nothing to you five years from now. Achieving balance
in your life will be an ever changing experience.

Complications in your life make finding balance a much more difficult task. That is why I
suggest living a simple life to help you create balance in your life. The less things you
have to deal with in life, the better. Balancing five stones on top of each other is much
easier than balancing thirty stones. The more we can focus on individual aspects of our
lives, the better. When we spread ourselves too thin, our balance is bound to be thrown
off.


Ways To Create Balance By Living Simple

   •   Forget multi-tasking, single-task instead - By putting your full focus and
       energy on one specific task at a time, your best work is achieved. Put quality
       before quantity. Always strive for excellence in all that you do. Do few things, but
       do them well.


   •   Spend more time with friends and family - Never forget your loved ones. They
       are the ones that will catch you when you are about to fall. They are the ones
       who will guide you when you are lost. They are the ones that will support you
       when you are feeling weak. Cherish them and provide the same support for
       them. Always let the people who are important in your life know how much they
       mean to you. It can never be said too much.


   •   Eat healthy - In the words of Count Rugen from The Princess Bride: “If you
       haven’t got your health, then you haven’t got anything.” Implementing a simple,
       healthy diet into your life will not only make you feel better and more balanced,
       but it will also be cheaper. Eating fast food or prepackaged food not only costs
       more, but has less nutritional value. Don’t forget to enjoy and savor what you eat.




   •   Exercise regularly - The quote above can be applied to this one as well.
       Exercise is needed to balance out the time that you are inactive. Combine this
       with a healthy diet and your body will be balanced physically.


   •   Spend less than what you make - This simple principle is easy to understand,
       but can be difficult to live by. If you are in mounds of debt, that is obviously going
       to disrupt the balance in your life. By spending less than what you make, you can
       slowly get out of debt and stay out of debt.




   •   Integrate your passions with your career - Having a job that you are
       passionate is so important in achieving balance. A good chunk of everyone’s life
       will be spent at work. If there is no meaning or passion behind your job, it will
       have a negative affect on you. Following your passion in your career might not
       yield you as much money, but it will bring you much more happiness and
       balance. The benefit of living a simple life is that you don’t need that much
       money to sustain yourself anyway, so money should not be a problem.


   •   Rid yourself of material possessions - Having too much stuff can make you
       feel trapped or weighed down. Give away or sell the things that you never use
       anymore. When you go shopping, ask yourself: “Do I really need this?”


   •   Write in a journal or blog - If you are anything like me, then you have ideas and
       thoughts swirling throughout your brain all day. I forget things and lose track of
       things so easily. Writing your thoughts and ideas down helps you remember them
       and make sense out of them. It helps you see the big picture in your life. It can
       provide insight as to what areas of your life need work and what areas are going
       smoothly.


   •   Learn from others - Observe your friends and family. Which ones are
       successful, happy, and seem to live a quality life? What is differentiates their lives
       from yours? What habits do they have? Don’t be afraid to talk to them and ask
       them questions about how they live their life. Finding balance should never have
       to be a lonely task.

There are many other ways to bring balance to your life by living simple. What are
some ways that living simple has increased balance in your life? What is your
definition of balance?




Career and Life Balance — By Stefanie Zizzo,
    Stefanie Zizzo Career & Life Coach

Yesterday I was sitting on the back deck at Aqueduct Conference Center in Chapel Hill.
If you have ever been there, you know how beautiful and serene the view is from that
spot. You see a large expanse of grass, an abundance of trees in the distance and a
plethora of bushes with large purple flowers buzzing with bees right in front of me.

The reason I was there was that I had been invited to deliver a seminar on Personal and
Professional Life Balance to graduate students from NC State. My talk focused on the
theme of Choice and the role it plays in creating balance in our lives. Choice of what we
do, how we do it, when and where we do it, who we are when we are doing it and the
type of support we choose.

In preparation for this presentation, the students were asked to complete a Signature
Strengths Quesionnaire (you can try it too, it’s free) that measures what matters most to
each of us. Knowing what matters most is a critical component in making the best
choices. I completed it as well. One of my top 5 was “appreciation of beauty and
excellence”.

So yesterday, when finished for the day, instead of rushing off to my next appointment, I
decided to spend a few moments basking in the beauty on the back deck, I then chose
to take the longer but more beautiful route home on the backroads near Jordan Lake
rather than the interstate.

Those choices - taking those few moments of quiet and beauty were rejuvenating and
truly balanced my day!





Following the Path…One Step at a Time — By Jean,
    Stress to Power

         Our lives are frittered away in details. Simplify. Simplify.
         —Henry David Thoreau


         People say that what we’re all seeking is a meaning for life. I
         don’t think that’s what we’re really seeking. I think that what
         we’re seeking is an experience of being alive, so that our life
         experiences on the physical plane will have resonances within
         our own innermost being and reality….
         —Joseph Campbell in The Power Myth


I’ve always had a lot of inner drive, but I’ve never been achievement oriented…except
when I was a kid, when I wanted to do well in school. I hear a lot these days about how
hectic life can be as we try to juggle all the demands makes of us. I’ve never had that
problem as an adult. I’ve always agreed with Thoreau: “Simplify. Simplify.”

Some people seem to think that would mean accepting an impoverished life. On the
contrary. It means having the time and attention to appreciate what we have, to be able
to do what’s truly important to us. (See Living Every, Every Minute.) For me it
sometimes meant doing things that society doesn’t admire, like taking ten years out to
raise a child…doing some volunteering, working together (including my husband) on
family projects and just “hanging out” and enjoying my daughter while she was still
young.

At other times it meant doing things that are more officially exciting and honored by our
culture…see Building a Solid Foundation and Making Hay While the Sun Shines. What
worked for me was to enjoy each period of my life as it came and not try to do
everything at once.




I learned about the joy of simplifying when I was in grammar school. My sister and I
were taking dancing lessons, and sometime in early December we had a recital. I don’t
remember much about it, except that because it was so close to Christmas the
organizers treated us by allowing us to go through a line with a long table full of toys.
We could choose anything we wanted. My sister and I chose carefully and each decided
we wanted one of the balls. As we were leaving we saw other kids with armloads of
goodies…it turns out we didn’t have to choose just one thing, we could have had as
much as our arms could have carried. At first we felt foolish and wanted to go back and
try again, but then we decided that’s not what we really wanted. We really wished the
rule had been what we had assumed, that we could each pick only one thing. If we had
a huge pile of toys then none of them would have been special.

No, I’ve never been tempted by the idea that the more we do and the more we have the
happier we will be. As I’ve said, I do have an inner drive, so when my husband and I got
back from our 15 months in Europe and traveling around the world (again see Building a
Solid Foundation) it was time for me to figure out what I wanted to do next. The usual
advice of envisioning your ideal future and setting goals to achieve it didn’t work for me.
I just wanted to live deeply and find work that I loved to do. I wanted to enjoy the
process of living, and that was something I couldn’t envision. I finally realized it wasn’t
something I could see, it was something I had to feel. Maybe I couldn’t see around
the next corner, but I could tell when I was on the right path. I still remember where
I was standing when I realized that. It was another life-changing moment. I suddenly
had an inner gyroscope…I was free to explore without worrying about becoming lost.

I don’t always consciously know where I’m going, but my inner path is there and I can
tune into it. The important thing is taking this approach means there is no rush,
there is no frustration about not moving fast enough to meet external goals. All I
have to do is follow the path, one step at a time.


Balance, in terms of juggling priorities, is seldom a problem for me now. If I find myself
having conflicting priorities, I step back and simplify my life so I can focus on what’s
most important. It goes back to the Traits of Stress-Hardy, Resilient People:



         They realize that the quality of our lives depends on how we
         focus our energy and our attention. They try to align their
         thoughts and actions with their values. They know how to
         motivate themselves to take action.


I don’t know if this approach would work for everyone. I enjoy working and don’t have
trouble motivating myself, assuming it’s something I want to do. And because we’ve
kept our lives simple and have always lived beneath our means, my husband and I have
a lot of financial freedom. It works for us.

What About You? Is your life in balance? Are you trying to do too much? Do you need
more challenges? Do you have an inner path that you’re tuned into? What works for
you?




The Key to Happiness and Balance is Right With You, Just
    Learn to Use It — By Maya, Think Maya

This is Part 3 of the Series titled “The key to happiness and balance is right with you,
just learn to use it”. In Part 1 of the series, I told you exactly WHY we need a framework
and introduced you to the “thinkmaya framework” foundation. In this Part 2 of the series,
I talked about HOW we prepare ourselves to be able to apply the framework
successfully. In Part 3(here), I will, with the help of 3 thinkmaya readers, introduce the
framework and discuss a few of its applications


Learning to use the framework
In this post I will discuss how to apply the thinkmaya framework. Three thinkmaya
readers have graciously shared their situations with us. After giving an overview of each
of the steps in the process I follow it with how each of the three readers would possibly
apply it to their lives and their situations.

Before I start, here are the situations as shared by Mare, Lance and Stacey in their own
words:

   •     Mare: My issue is eating sweets. I exercise religiously Monday to Friday, cardio
   and weights. I’ve decided to increase the time and speed of my jogging, and I’m
   doing very well with that as well. However, I’m having trouble transferring the
   discipline that I have when it comes to exercise, to staying away from sweets.

   •     Lance: I have a job I really like, and a company I really like to work for.
   However…as much as I like it, I don’t love what I do. What I have fallen in love with
   is writing. I’m not sure if this fits what you’re looking for… The situation then is that
   I’m torn between doing what I love (without pay right now) or doing what I really like
   (with the comfort on a regular paycheck). My present region is probably in thoughts.
   I have been thinking about this quite a bit. I want this problem to become an
   opportunity to expand into work that I love. It’s difficult because I happen to really like

   where I’m at currently in my life. All around, where I’m at is a good place. But I also
   know it could be better. The question for me becomes how do I move confidently
   toward whatever “better” is for me.

   •   Stacey: With everything going on in my life, my house is a clutter magnet (there
       is no time to clean up after everyone). I feel frustrated. I try to pick up a little
       every day. I tried a professional organizer (she helped but she’s not a long term
       solution). I think I’m in region 4. I want to feel a sense of serenity from my home
       (not a sense of clutter and chaos). My destination is a happy core based on your
       framework.

Using the framework
Using the framework essentially means following some steps that will help you inch
closer to your goal. The crux of the framework lies in the step where you analyze/act.
Each of the steps are equally important as noted in the descriptions below.

Step1: Detach

   •   Move away from the problem for sometime - mentally, physically and
       emotionally

   •   In order to help you do that, choose activities that are in a different space
       than the one you are in now.

The way I see it, “detach” is the very first step to finding a solution to any
problem/situation. It follows from the fact that disengaging ourselves is the first
and essential step towards an unbiased analysis of our situation. It is about
creating a distance and removing ourselves from the situation physically, mentally and
emotionally. This is certainly not an easy task when we are “stuck” in the middle of a
problem but it is entirely possible by letting our thoughts, emotions and actions help
each other out. For example, if we are dealing with an emotional situation with another
person and want to detach ourselves emotionally, we have to first create a physical
distance from the person you are dealing with. If we are consumed by our thoughts, we
cannot stop thinking by thinking more. It has to be done by choosing an activity that
probably involves our emotions and actions (see activity matrix below). For how long
should we detach? Depends on the intensity of your problem. Depends on how long you
take to feel ready to deal with the problem. Emotional issues are the ones that require
the longest time to detach.

   •   Mare: Mare should remove all sweets(and hence temptation) from her
   surroundings such as her home and her office. (Remember this is not a long term
   solution and is not expected to work long term. This is just step 1). Removing the
   temptation will lessen the possibility that Mare will be upset by her actions and
   hence give her some space and time “away” from her problem. For an indirect
   approach, Mare should also make sure that she nourishes her body at regular
   intervals with sufficient carbs and fruits. Starving yourself of what the nutrients her
   body needs will push you closer to the problem by creating an intense desire to eat
   sweets. (If there is an emotional component that causes Mare to want sweets she
   should try to distance herself from that as well. For the sake of simplicity, I am
   assuming there is no emotional component here.)

   •   Lance: Lance has been thinking a lot about writing. Thinking a whole lot. But
   Lance needs to give this thinking a break knowing that a solution will come. He
   needs a break from his thinking so he can realign his approach. Perhaps the solution
   for Lance here is to get consumed with something at his work or create a new goal
   for himself that is not writing related. In his case it might be as simple as taking a
   shower or watching a movie. Whatever it takes to get ready to change gears on
   dealing with this situation.

   •   Stacey: Of all the three people here, it looks like Stacey is the one most in need
   of creating detachment. Stacey’s mind is cluttered as the result of the clutter in her
   home. Stacey needs to create a sanctuary for herself in order to be able to deal with
   her issue. A room. A desk. A corner. Some physical space away from all the clutter.
   She needs to create that space, go away and have fun for a day with something
   physically intense activity and come back mentally and emotionally refreshed.



Step 2 : Detox

   •   Accept your situation. Promise cooperation.
   •   Give yourself a reality talk.

This is where you further detach through a specific way - by “letting go”. This is where
we tell ourselves, “It is okay, perfectly okay to be in this situation”. It is complete
acceptance of ourselves and the other person without a second question. This is the
point where we forgive everyone involved in the situation and really get ready to act on
the problem. This step is critical - you cannot work with yourself if you do not accept
yourself. What if we are not able to let go? What if we cannot forgive? This essentially
means that we have not “detached” sufficiently from our problem. We need to go back
to step 1. (None of the examples provided below involve multiple people but it should be
noted that “detox” is hardest when multiple people are involved in a situation)

   •   Mare: Millions of people have a sweet tooth and millions more have dealt with it.
   The reality is that it is not easy to transfer the discipline of exercise to eating directly.
   The truth is that the motivators are what need to be transferred and the discipline will
   follow (easier said than done).

   •   Lance: Lance probably already knows this but it is a great situation he is in. He
   has 2 things in life - a thing he loves to do and a thing that brings him money. But he
   is also going through something a lot of people do at some point - a conflict between
   what they love and what brings money.

   •   Stacey: Stacey has kids and she works from home. And she works a lot. Stacey
   should tell herself that it is totally normal to have a cluttered home in such situations.
   Kids have more stuff and kids rarely help with cleanup.


Step 3 : Define

   •   Set your goals.

   •   Keep them realistic. Keep them achievable

Once you have detached yourself from the problem temporarily and accepted your
situation, take a few minutes to define what you want. List both the tangible and
intangibles goals here. If you are dealing with an issue regarding another person define
what is most important at the end - your relationship, how you feel, how the other
person feels etc. It is important to keep the goals realistic and achievable. The goals
can always be modified later but for now, take small steps.

   •   Mare: What does Mare want to achieve? Does she want to eat sweets mindfully?
   Does she want to eat just a couple of sweets a week? Does she want to stop eating
   sweets all together?

   •   Lance: Lance needs to decide what is important to him at this point. Does he
   want to start writing right away? Does he want to create the best possible future for
   himself even if it takes a couple of years?

   •   Stacey: Stacey needs to define what she means by wanting a sense of serenity.
   What spaces matter most to Stacey. What kind of clutter is unacceptable?


Step 4/5 : Analyze/Act

   •   Use the framework picture. See where you are and where you want to be.

   •   Set a strategy for moving towards your goal.

   •   Use activities that involve the dormant member/members of your governing
       body in order to secretly (mostly) tease yourself into the happy core.


The next two steps are ones that take time since this is where the real problem is
attacked. These two steps will also be repeated over and over again until you are done
dealing with whatever you are working on. Change always comes in small steps and so
it is here as well. Analyse /act can be considered one step since they are so intricately
connected to one another. When we are so caught up in a problem it is really hard to
think up a solution. Moreover, just thinking up a solution rarely solves a problem. Acting
on it is just as important. Here is real truth: “thinking” really involves thinking with your
heart, head and gut (body) which implies that thinking and acting are often overlapping
activities. Analyze/Act is therefore a continuous effort to slowly but steadily inch towards
the solution.

It is iterative - Think -> Act -> Accept/Reject -> Think -> Act -> Accept/Reject …

1. Analyze to see which region you lie in. After step 1 and 2, the answer to this might
differ - so be aware of that.

2. If you are in a combined region (4, 5 or 6), you are stuck rather firmly between two of
your three components. (Remember I called the heart, brain and body the members of
your internal governing body). More often than not, two of the three members here are
strongly bound and are helping each other and you slide the downward spiral. The
distant third member is rarely heard in this case. In such cases, you have to tease
yourself out of your spiral slowly, using the third member to pull the dominant members
in the direction you want – slowly and one at a time. For example, if you are in region 4
and feel stuck between your emotions and thoughts, then your solutions will be
achieved by choosing actions (the third member) that involve emotions and actions that
involve thoughts. Use activities that are in the thoughts/emotions box (to tease your
thoughts in the right direction) and the actions/emotions box (to tease your actions in
the right direction).

Mare and Stacey seem to be in combined regions. Mare is a victim of her thoughts and
actions. I have made some assumptions here but it seems like she is telling herself it is
wrong to eat sweets but is acting contrary to it. She does get upset but only AFTER she
has consumed the sweets. Mare is stuck firmly between her thoughts and wrong actions
with no emotional component(my assumption) to either of them.

Stacey here is caught between her thoughts and emotions. She is mostly upset with the
clutter in her home. She is not able to really think beyond that since the physical clutter is translating into mental clutter as well. She has not really acted on it much until now.
Yes, she got an organizer, but that is more of a mental decision than a physical action
on her part.

3. If you are in a pure region, you have been strongly consumed by one member of the
governing board – the acting Hitler. In this case, you need to choose activities that
involve only the other two members (and give acting Hitler a break).

Lance is in the region of thoughts. He has thought a lot about his issue, which is great.
But my guess is that he will not feel a sense of fulfillment unless he acts on his thoughts
or makes an emotional commitment to all the thinking he has been doing. He has
probably been thinking his situation so much that he probably needs a break from the
thinking to get a truer perspective of his situation. It is time to do that. With time he will
get a better sense of he “feels” about his writing and what writing involves in the long
run. The little action steps here might redefine the situation for Lance and/or just inch
him towards a long term solution.

   •   Mare: As mentioned before I believe Mare is in a combined region of thoughts
       and actions. She knows that eating sweets is wrong for her but she is having a
       hard time controlling her actions. What is missing here is the underlying
       emotional connection/current between her actions and her thoughts. Some
       emotion/thoughts activities that could help Mare are


       •   Reading as much as she can about how bad sugar is for the human mind and
       body. Read extensively and read material that is thought provoking and shocking
       (in order to evoke emotional responses). I do not know what Mare’s motivation
       for exercise is but she needs to work on transferring the same motivation here. Is
       she afraid of being fat and unhealthy? Is she rewarding herself in a positive way?

       •   Watch documentaries that relate to health and diet. Visuals have more of a
       lasting emotional impact. Identify the biggest fear with respect to the ill effects of
       sugar and hang on to it to prevent from eating too many sweets

   Some action/emotion activities would be:
      •   Cooking healthy. Enjoying other foods. Make a ritual of eating healthy. Try to
      really enjoy the act of eating other foods such as fruit. Think of times when she
      has sugar cravings and pre-plan an emotionally satisfying activity such as eating
      a favorite fruit while reading the best blogs etc.

      •   Complement eating less sweets with drinking lots of water. This is great and it
      works for me. I carry water bottle with me at all times and it works like a security
      blanket. I enjoy the ritual of taking a break and filling my bottle. Water feels great
      for the body and skin and I have started to believe it has a big hand in helping me
      maintain my weight as well.

      •   Say no. Voice the emotions and talk about how bad sweets are for her with
      everyone - just as she would talk about how good it feels to exercise. Talk about
      her your little achievements

  The main idea for Mare is to find her underlying emotions and use them
  appropriately. Mare is extremely well read and it should not be hard for her to
  find a lot of repulsive material explaining the ill effects of sugar. Since she is
  already exercising she should work on finding the emotional motivators
  behind her discipline for exercise. Finally, at moments when she cannot seem
  to control her desire for sweets, she should have some “feel good actions”
  that she can turn to.

  •   Lance: Lance is stuck in think-land. He needs to immerse himself in activities
  that involve actions and emotions. Ideally, the actions will involve something he will
  make a part of his future (writing) and something that will explore him giving up the
  seemingly unimportant(his present job). By noting his emotional response to these
  activities. Best thing to do is to get intensely involved in action/emotion activities
  such as:


  •   Create a dreamboard. Talk about the things that really matter (not the writing, but
      how you like to feel etc) with your spouse.

  •   Write your emotional/financial goals in life. Talk to family about what kind of a
      future they are looking forward to.

  •   Talk to writers about their life and lifestyle (not about writing). Ask them about
      their best and worst times. Is this the life you look forward to?

  •   Do not think about writing but choose a writing project(to make money) and just
      write. Take a week of vacation from your present job and write as you would write
      if you decided to pursue writing as a career.

  •   Is there a project that involves writing at the present job? Can that be picked up?

  The main idea for Lance here is to stop thinking about his choices and create
  situations to start “acting and feeling” as if he has already made certain
  decisions. Like giving himself a trial run. If these activities give positive
  feedback then Lance takes bigger and bigger steps towards his goal of
  becoming a writer such as slowly increasing his writing work and reducing the
  hours at his present job. Or if he gets a very good feeling from his trial
  projects he could decide to just quit his full time job if he believes he has the
  financial cushion to do that.

  •   Stacey: Stacey’s home and mind are cluttered. She is upset. She is consumed
      by her thoughts and emotions. She desperately needs to balance her life out with
      some actions.


      •   First and foremost, Stacey needs to act on acting by getting rid of 80% of the
      items in her home. Boxing it away would be the easiest. Put away most of the
      clothes, toys, dishes and knick knacks. We probably use just 20% of the stuff
      80% of the time, so Stacey should be just fine. And she should do this knowing
      that it is temporary and she can get anything out of a box if she really wants to.


      •   With much much lesser stuff around the house, Stacey is ready to now take
      baby steps to solve the real problem and make it a lifestyle. Stacey is ready to
      get consumed by action/thought and action/emotion activities. Stacey needs to
      take about 10 - 15 minutes every couple of hours and do something that makes
      her “feel good”. Turn on the music and iron a couple of clothes. Put half the
      laundry away. Wipe a counter clean and shiny. Take joy and notice the little
       actions of cleaning she is doing. Take her mind away from focusing on a clutter
       free home to focusing on a clutter free counter, a clutter free table and a clutter
       free room. Celebrate the clean space by putting just one object there - such as
       the reflection of her authentic self.

       •   Try to do mundane activity like iron clothes while thinking about creative ways
       to get kids to participate in cleaning the house. Hire a sitter for an hour everyday
       and tackle cleaning the high priority areas while the kids are kept busy. Take 15
       minutes before going to bed and tidy up. Box away any unnecessary lurkers.

The idea for Stacey here is to choose activities that do not just involve cleanup
but end up feeling like a break in her day. Her focus should be away from the
clutter and on the little clean spaces and sanctuaries that she is creating. She will
never have a completely clutter free home but she can reduce the clutter and
create clutter free spaces. Stacey’s progress might be slow but she will certainly
succeed if she 1. boxes away 80% of her stuff and 2. focuses on the good feeling
behind what she has already cleaned and takes focus away from the existing
clutter.

It is important to note that this step could take weeks, months or years. Monitor your
progress with every new activity you try. Stick with the ones that work and discard what
does not. Redefine your problem and/or your goals as and when you think appropriate.
Be very mindful of what effect your choices are having on your initial goal.




Step 6 : Shield

   •   Take pride in your achievements but store memories of the uphill battle.

   •   Recognize familiar landscapes and act quickly.

   •   Treat the core of the issue, not the symptoms.

In business strategy terms this would be called “raising barriers of entry”. Once you
have worked on a problem and are close to a solution you have to safe guard yourself
from the problem attacking you again. Awareness is the single most effective way for us
to do this. Do not get paranoid, but learn to notice small signs that the problem may be
creeping back. This is easier than we think. Since we have done all the work and made
the progress up until then in small steps of analyze/act, falling backwards just puts us in
a landscape we recognize well. Awareness of the landscape should kick us back into
action mode. Secondly, take great pride in your progress and achievements. Talk about
it and accept it when people give you complements. When we take pride in something
we have accomplished we tend to naturally safeguard it. The sense of satisfaction we
achieve while working through a problem is the greatest motivator for us to keep the
problem/situation away.

Have you had situations that Mare, Lance and Stacey have talked about? What has
worked for you? Do you think this framework applies in your life? Share your thoughts
and ideas here.

Life Balance, Part Two: It’s a Jigsaw Puzzle — By Shelly
    Kneupper Tucker, This Eclectic Life

By anyone’s standards, my Daddy was a successful man. He owned his own electrical
contracting company and made money hand over fist. His hours were long, but he got
everything done every day. On weekends, he took the family to our vacation home (a
trailer) at Lake Texoma. Though he spent a lot of time fishing, he fished as aggressively
as he worked. He was always going, going, going.

At the age of 52, my Daddy sold his company and retired to the dream home he had
built at the lake. He planned to spend his “sunset years” fishing and traveling with
Momma, gardening, cooking, and waiting on the grandbabies to be born.


Before the first year of his retirement was over, my Daddy had a heart attack.

He had worked so hard during his lifetime that he never took time for himself. He didn’t
take care of himself. Though he recovered from that attack, he was never healthy again.
He had open heart surgery five years later and then a host of other diseases that
slowed him to a crawl until the end of his days.

I spoke in Part One about a woman I knew who was “walking a tight rope … blindfolded
… while juggling chainsaws … without a net!” She had her life packed full of activities,
and was so busy that she was physically exhausted. Yet, she felt her life was in balance
because she was well organized — she got “everything done.” Every activity was
scheduled in her calendar and “to do” list — right down to the “spontaneous play time”
with her children.

I have a hard time believing that she is really enjoying any of the activities that she
does. I worry that she is on the same fast track that my Daddy took.

I firmly believe that we have to find balance in our lives, but I don’t want to think of
“balance” as walking a tightrope. And, I think that perhaps we need perspective more.
I like to think of life as a jigsaw puzzle. We have to work to fit all the pieces of our lives
together: family life, career, education, hobbies, and most importantly time to take care
of ourselves.

In order to successfully complete a jigsaw puzzle, sometimes you have to step back and
look at the whole picture in perspective. I think that to attain balance in our lives, that’s
the very first step.


Look at your life in perspective. What are the activities that make up your day …
week … month? Which of those activities are essential in your life? Don’t forget to add
“time to take care of yourself” to the list.

Getting perspective is something we should do often because we change and grow as
we age. The things that are important in our twenties might not be so essential in our
fifties.

Prioritize those essential areas of your life. Determine your goals for each area, and
the steps you need to take to reach those goals.

Simplify. Your high school English teacher told you that everything improves with
editing. Make some choices. At first you might think that there is nothing that you can
delete from your list of activities. Look harder. There are pieces of the puzzle that might
not fit right now.

For instance, if you are juggling a demanding job and raising children, this might not be
the best time to try learn to snorkel, take up basket weaving and try to get your graduate
degree. Or, if all five of your children are involved in ten different extra-curricular
activities, you might have to get them to pare it down so you don’t spend every evening
as a shuttle bus driver. Will it warp little Johnnie for life if he can’t be in Boy Scouts,
soccer, karate, guitar class, and take horseback riding lessons? No, it won’t. And, it will
leave him some time to just be a little kid (and leave you some time to breathe).

Learn to say, “No.” It’s a simple word, really, and it’s the same in several languages. I
promise you that the world will not fall apart if the PTA asks you to head a committee

and you say “no.” And, if you show up at a meeting, you know someone will ask you, so
be prepared.

You do not have to qualify the “no.” Don’t get defensive and tell your reasons why. Just
say no. At the very least, learn not to say “yes” immediately. Learn to say, “Let me think
about it and I’ll get back to you.”

Delegate. There is nothing in the rule books that says you have to be all things to all
people. I know that the media has us convinced that we have to be supermom or
superdad. But, we are humans. The kids can learn chores around the house (even at
very early ages). Other members of a committee can help with assignments. You do not
have to do everything by yourself.

Relax. Your house doesn’t have to look like a picture from Elle Decor (unless
photographers from that magazine or on their way to shoot pictures!). You don’t have to
serve a five course meal every night. If you didn’t weed your flower bed, probably the
home owner’s association won’t kick you out. Stop measuring yourself by impossible
standards.

Start over with the first step. These are all lessons that I have learned the hard way. I
admit that I don’t always have an easy time following my own advice, because I
inherited my Daddy’s Type A personality. I keep reminding myself of my resolve each
day (reminding myself is at the top of my “to do” list). I promise it gets easier as you go
along.



Refresh Again — By Transformative Living

I would install a refresh button for my mind and body. What would it feel like if we had
a “refresh button” for our minds?

On my computer if I think that something new may be in my Inbox or on the current
internet page I just hit the refresh button. I make a conscious choice to do this because I
am either hoping for something new or I am aware that what I am seeing on my screen
may no long be the most up-to-date data.

For me, a refresh button holds more hope than “putting it all behind me” as if I can drop
all that my body has encountered. This common piece of advice has undertones that:
a) somehow we can just wipe out old data (aka experiences) and start with a clean slate
b) that even difficult or challenging old data serves no purpose in our lives
c)that we can ignore what our body knows and holds in our cells, muscles, gut all about
that experience and that ignoring it means that cellular bodily-felt data doesn’t exist for
us really.

The internet metaphor holds more hope for me:

   •   I can refresh my experience and still be on the same page; in the refreshing I
       may see what is new just now

   •   I can acknowledge I have a “history folder” where all my experiences are
       recorded and filed

   •   I can acknowledge I have favourites pages

So, how would it feel to live remembering to refresh?

It might encourage me to notice how today is different from yesterday. I might notice that
my partner is not in the same frame of mind even though I am carrying some of
yesterday into today.

I might stop in the middle of a conversation or interpersonal encounter and refresh and
then notice I am feeling different to when the conversation/encounter started or the
other(s) are not doing/saying what I expected.

I might stop at some point in a habitual reaction and try and see if something new is
here that shifts my experience. I might not load my normal program.

I might notice the play of light and shadow in my visual field or the shifting sounds
around me. I might feel my body, how I am holding it, how it is connecting to the
environment through touch, heat, movement.

I might use “refresh” to take a new, fresh breath to connect inwardly to how I am in
there.

I might take something with which I feel familiar and perceive it in a new light.

I might reframe an experience by capturing more data.


What might you do if you had a refresh button?


Juggling Life’s Balls — By Urban Panther,
    Urban Panther’s Lair

I have jumped right into this initiative with both feet, because I am such an expert on
balance. Well, maybe not exactly an expert. Alright, I kind of suck at it, but that definitely
means I have something to say.

The first image that came to mind, when I thought of life balance, was me juggling a
whole bunch of balls. And I mean a whole bunch! All different colours and sizes, and
each labeled in bold black lettering. IT Project Manager, Mom, Girlfriend, Friend, Sister,
Daughter, Cook, Dishwasher, Pet Owner. And the balls kept multiplying until eventually I
dropped each and every one of them.

Did I mention I totally suck at Life Balance?

But then I realized that I was juggling the entirely wrong set of balls! I didn’t need all
those; I just need four. And they happen to coincide with the personal core values that I
established using a technique posted by Davina, at Loving Pulse, which are:

Physical: with a smile on my face and a sparkle in my eyes, I tune into the wonders of
my physical body.

Intellectual: I use my creativity and wit to provoke thoughts in myself and others.

Emotional: I move through my life content and happy, exploring my passions and love.

Spiritual: I honour the Lord and Lady, and revel in the third stage of womanhood, The
Crone, having passed successfully through Maid and Mother.

And the really neat thing is, that I don’t have to have all four balls in the air at the same
time. I can put one or two down once in awhile for a rest. As long as I keep rotating
them, such that they all get their turn in a timely manner, my life is quite balanced
indeed.

Hey, maybe I don't suck so badly at Life Balance after all!

Are you 'in balance' or are there one or two balls that need to be brushed off and put
back into play?


Achieve Success While Maintaining a Healthy Work Life
    Balance — By Kathy Hendershot-Hurd, Virtual Impax

Entrepreneurship is a lot like athletic competition: if you don’t prepare yourself mentally
AND physically, you’ll find you don’t have what it takes to play the entire game. The
competition in the business world is grueling and relentless and you have to be able to
play until the final buzzer!

This is one of those “Do as I say - not as I do” kind of blog posts for me. Like Monika
Mundell, I too have been suffering the health consequences of living a life that has
fallen out of balance.

Success is all about balance.

I love word pictures and here’s one to illustrate my point: to achieve success in your
business, you must stand upon a three legged stool. The three legs of the stool are:

   •    Exercise

   •    Eat Right

   •    Sleep

Trying to build a business which requires you to work 12 - 16 hours a day without doing
those three essential things is a recipe for disaster.

It could be that the purpose of your life is only to serve as a warning to others.

Here is my story of life balance disaster. Let is serve as a warning to others.

It started 6 months ago when I fell out of the habit of daily exercise. I believe exercise is
an essential ingredient in your quest for success. Your body was created to move, not
to sit in a chair all day. Daily exercise sharpens not only your body, but your mind as
well.

In my case, exercise is the foundation of EVERYTHING healthy and good in my life.

Exercise serves to keep my diet “healthy”.

For example, if I try to eat my favorite food of all time - Pop-Tarts [cue angelic singing] -
and exercise, I’ll find that I struggle to finish my workout. If however, breakfast is a bowl
of steel cut oats or an omelet, I’ll have enough energy to exercise and then jump into
working. If I don’t eat healthy, I see the effects when I exercise.

Exercise also helps you get a good night’s sleep.

When I’m exercising, the quality and quantity of my sleep is GREATLY improved. When
I don’t exercise, well - I begin to become acquainted with the various mattress
companies infomercials which run during the wee hours of the morning.

So for more than 3 years, my day would begin by putting on my walking shoes, putting a
leash on my dog and walking a mile or more every morning. If 7:00 AM rolled around
and I didn’t have on my walking shoes, my dog would begin barking relentlessly until I
started our pre-walk ritual. If I didn’t know better, I’d swear that silly dog could tell time!

Then, I came down with the flu. I guess the dog knew something was up because
instead of launching his full scale high decibel barking assault, he just whimpered and
whined outside my bedroom door.

Well, the habit was broken with the dog after a week - and when the daily exercise
stopped, everything else went to hell in a hand basket.

So at this point in time, I’m not walking, I’m busy working and my family is subsisting on
Pop-Tarts, frozen pizzas and fast food. It should come as no surprise that I began
having trouble sleeping about this time.

Fast forward just a few months. I feel like crap and my twisted, nutrition deprived mind
decides the problem lies in a partially impacted wisdom tooth that has recently
emerged.

It’s not my junk food diet that is making me feel like crap. It’s not my lack of
exercise that is making me feel like crap. It’s not the fact that I’m only sleeping 4
hours a night that I feel like crap- it’s my tooth that is the root of all evil.

In a nutshell, my idiot dentist prescribes an antibiotic to which I have a reaction which
the leaflet says could be fatal. When I call the office, the woman says, “Don’t worry
about it. We’ll see you next Tuesday.” The idiot dentist pulls the infected tooth and the
infection rages out of control. A month later, a doctor is telling me,” This is really
serious. You could die.” I walk out with a referral to an ENT and enough prescriptions
to start my own pharmacy.

After CAT scans, blood tests, specialists and way too many hours sitting in doctor’s
waiting rooms, I’m really regretting NOT paying attention to maintaining a healthy life
balance.

Oh, I’m so back on the “wagon” when it comes to diet and exercise - the sleep thing just
follows naturally when I’m doing the first two.

It could be that the purpose of your life is only to serve as a warning to others.

Don’t wait until you’re making the rounds of various doctor’s offices to pay attention to
the “basics” you need to achieve success. Trust me, productivity takes a NOSE DIVE
when you’re spending your days in a doctor’s waiting room!

If the three legged stool is in balance - exercise, eat right and adequate sleep - then you
have a firm foundation upon which to operate your business. If you think you can
“cheat” the system - think again. It’s true - an ounce of prevention is really worth a
pound of cure!

I thought I was invincible - and I discovered I’m human.     I guess that discovery is just
another part of the aging process!



Be an Optimist — By Dave Jones, Your Friendly CPA

On the surface life balance to me is balancing family and career, saving for tomorrow or
living for today, or the many items that we try to balance in our lives.

However, this is just the surface of life balance. Life is 10% what we make it and 90%
how we take it. Applying this principle to my life, my attitude has more to do with my life
than how I have applied the daily activities. What is he talking about you ask? What I
mean is that even if I have my 10% in balance; my career time versus my family time,
and work versus play, if I am still approaching this with a negative pessimistic attitude
will I truly be happy?

I believe we must get our 90% in check before working on our 10%. I believe we can
learn to be optimists. We can learn to approach each and every event and challenge in
our lives with a positive attitude, find the silver lining. With that being said, I know some
may have medical conditions that take precedence over their attitude, I am not a
medical professional and for those that do face these challenges, please consult a
professional.

For those who do not have any underlying medical conditions here are a few tips to
being optimistic. However before applying the tips, you can go into this exercise
knowing that optimists tend to have overall health benefits compared to pessimists. In a
2002 Mayo Clinic report, studies showed those with an optimistic view tend to live
longer than their pessimistic counterparts. The study also showed optimists reported:

   •   Fewer problems with work and daily activities
   •   Less pain and fewer limitations due to pain
   •   Less interference from physical or emotional problems
   •   Increased energy
   •   Feeling more peaceful, happier and calmer


Life will inevitably be faced with challenges and frustrations. It’s up to you to improve
your life and enhance your overall being. You can do a number of things to experience
greater joy and pleasure in life:

   •   Exercise. Aerobic exercise releases endorphins - the feel good substance -which
   reduces stress, depression and anxiety. Next time you get upset try taking a half hour
   walk and leave the I-Pod at home. Enjoy the sounds and smells around you and
   concentrate on counting your blessings. It will take practice but be cognizant of
   focusing on the positive.


   •   Eat Well. Your body is a machine and needs to be properly nourished to function.
   Eating a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, nuts and grains can improve the way you feel.


   •   Get plenty of rest. Sleep refreshes you. It improves your attitude and gives you
   energy for physical activity and coping with stress.


   •   Reduce Stress. Stress is a killer. Eliminating stress and conflict in your life will
   be rewarding.


Another suggestion is to start your day with an optimistic attitude, get out of bed 15
minutes early and get your mind in order to be positive for the day. Spend the 15
minutes in solitude and prepare for the upcoming day. Try repeating some of these
positive affirmations:

   •   Today, I am in control of my attitude no matter what happens. I am vital &
   energetic.
   •   I respond to stressful situations in healthy and healing ways. I am serene &
   peaceful.


If you are a true pessimist at heart, take your time but be confident that you can change
your attitude. When we get our attitudes in check then we need to make sure our life’s
activities are in balance. I am sure everyone has heard that no one has lain on their
death bed wishing they had spent more hours at the office. But first let’s concentrate on
the 90% of life, how we take it, and then get your 10% in check, how we make it.



Balancing the Unbalancable — By Kip de Moll,
    Zen and the Art of the Midlife Crisis

Here's a little ditty that goes something like this:

Since I was very young, random phrases have struck me as a bolt of lightening or like
being covered with a blanket on a cold night. Inspired to explore their boundaries, some
of these ideas I have determined to grow into a story or song.

Rarely has this been planned or committed with specific intention. In fact, if ego
becomes involved (or the vision of a book jacket arises), the process stutters painfully,
or halts completely, and that particular idea is usually abandoned.

Raised in a practical home of comfort and sensibility, however, although artistry was
celebrated, I have not been able to dare myself in actuality to pursue this passion with
all my heart. My head in the clouds has been balanced by feet on the ground, hands
earning a living as a contractor while my fingers ached to strum and type.

Amazingly (and probably predictably), this balance has been most unhealthy.

As construction has often served to put food on the table, for me, it has been only
marginally more stable than a life envisioned as a freelance writer. Prone to recession
and the whims and satisfaction of clients, it has paid well when it pays and other times
suffered devastating droughts of dollars, the roller coaster creating a tension that
contributed greatly to the dissolution of my marriage.

Still, a balance was carefully struck between writing contracts and creating stories and
songs. While I always anticipated taking time to truly express the creative passions, day
in and day out, the choice has been made to renovate and repair homes; my
contribution to the economics of the World going round. Music and stories, if they
happened at all, happened at night, and after awhile, dried up to nothing. Such is life, I
cheerfully lamented.

While I have easily blamed my financial struggles on slow markets, disappointed clients,
and the challenges of running an all too (for me) complicated business, I am beginning
to understand just how unbalanced my life has actually been. It is a vicious handicap to
prioritize an occupation while continually telling yourself you really want to be doing
something else.

In these past months, I have been listening to my heart. So many mornings now, I head
for the door, only to pause at the computer…and discover 2 or 3 hours later how fast
time has flown. If an idea sings loudly enough, I pull to the side of the road, or sit on a
bucket of mud, to scribble pages of yellow pads.

Today, I strive for less and create so much more. Instead of running a company building
$200,000 additions, I make some money on little necessary projects for people needing
the hand. Balancing that physical skill with an emotional talent to organize thoughts out
of an ethereal mist, Life is charged with an excitement I have little realized.

Daring myself to be off-balance, I have never felt better, nor been more
productive.

The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in
           Jerusalem.
Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities;
           all is vanity.
 What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under
           the sun?
 One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh:
           but the earth abideth for ever.
 The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to
           his place where he arose.
 The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the
           north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth
           again according to his circuits.
 All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto
           the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return
           again.
 All things are full of labour; man cannot utter it: the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.
 The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the sun.
Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? it hath been already of old time, which was before us.
There is no remembrance of former things; neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to come with those that shall come after.
I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.
And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all things that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath God given to the sons of man to be exercised therewith.
I have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and,
           behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. That which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which
           is wanting cannot be numbered.
 I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been before me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and knowledge. And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and
           folly: I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.
 For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth
           knowledge increaseth sorrow. I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth,
           therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also is vanity.
 I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What doeth it?
I sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting mine heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was that good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven all the days of their life.
I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me
           vineyards:
I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of
           all kind of fruits:
I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that
           bringeth forth trees:
I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of great and small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem before me:
 I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts.
So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.
And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: and this was my portion of all my labour.
 Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.
And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that which hath been already done.
 Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth darkness.
The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walketh in
           darkness: and I myself perceived also that one event happeneth
           to them all.
Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it
           happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I
           said in my heart, that this also is vanity.
For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool
           for ever; seeing that which now is in the days to come shall
           all be forgotten. And how dieth the wise man? as the fool.
 Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under
           the sun is grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of
           spirit.
 Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun: because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.
And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. This is also vanity.
Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labour which I took under the sun.
For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he leave it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil.
For what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of
           his heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun?
For all his days are sorrows, and his travail grief; yea, his
           heart taketh not rest in the night. This is also vanity.
There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also I saw, that it was from the hand of God.
 For who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto, more than I?
 For God giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God. This also is vanity and vexation of spirit.
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
           under the heaven:
A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a
           time to pluck up that which is planted;
A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and
           a time to build up;
A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a
           time to dance;
A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;
A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time
           to cast away;
A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and
           a time to speak;
A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time
           of peace.
 What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?
I have seen the travail, which God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised in it.
He hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also he hath set the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end.
I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to
           rejoice, and to do good in his life.
And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the
           good of all his labour, it is the gift of God.
I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doeth it, that men should fear before him.
That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already been; and God requireth that which is past.
And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that
           wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that
           iniquity was there.
I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the
           wicked: for there is a time there for every purpose and for
           every work.
I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men,
           that God might manifest them, and that they might see that
           they themselves are beasts.
 For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all is vanity.
All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to
           dust again.
Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the
           spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?
Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better, than that a man should rejoice in his own works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?
So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under the sun: and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter.
Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than
           the living which are yet alive.
Yea, better is he than both they, which hath not yet been, who
           hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.
Again, I considered all travail, and every right work, that for this a man is envied of his neighbour. This is also vanity and vexation of spirit.
The fool foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh.
Better is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full with travail and vexation of spirit.
Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun.
There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he hath neither child nor brother: yet is there no end of all his labour; neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither saith he, For whom do I labour, and bereave my soul of good? This is also vanity, yea, it is a sore travail.
Two are better than one; because they have a good reward for their labour.
For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not another to help him up.
Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can
           one be warm alone?
And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a
           threefold cord is not quickly broken.
Better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish
           king, who will no more be admonished.
For out of prison he cometh to reign; whereas also he that is
           born in his kingdom becometh poor.
I considered all the living which walk under the sun, with the
           second child that shall stand up in his stead.
There is no end of all the people, even of all that have been
           before them: they also that come after shall not rejoice in
           him. Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.
Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more
           ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools: for they
           consider not that they do evil.
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty
           to utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou
           upon earth: therefore let thy words be few.
For a dream cometh through the multitude of business; and a
           fool's voice is known by multitude of words.
When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he
           hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.
Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou
           shouldest vow and not pay.
Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the angel, that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?
21:005:007 For in the multitude of dreams and many words there are also divers vanities: but fear thou God.
21:005:008 If thou seest the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the matter: for he that is higher than the highest regardeth; and there be higher than they.
 Moreover the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself
           is served by the field.
He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor
           he that loveth abundance with increase: this is also vanity.
When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and
           what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding
           of them with their eyes?
The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little
           or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to
           sleep.
There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely,
           riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.
 But those riches perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a
           son, and there is nothing in his hand.
As he came forth of his mother's womb, naked shall he return
           to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labour, which
           he may carry away in his hand.
 And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came,
           so shall he go: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for
           the wind?
All his days also he eateth in darkness, and he hath much sorrow and wrath with his sickness.
Behold that which I have seen: it is good and comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour that he taketh under the sun all the days of his life, which God giveth him: for it is his portion.
Every man also to whom God hath given riches and wealth, and hath given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labour; this is the gift of God.
For he shall not much remember the days of his life; because
           God answereth him in the joy of his heart.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is
           common among men:
A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and honour, so
           that he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he desireth,
           yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger
           eateth it: this is vanity, and it is an evil disease.
If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so
           that the days of his years be many, and his soul be not filled
           with good, and also that he have no burial; I say, that an
           untimely birth is better than he.
For he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and
           his name shall be covered with darkness.
Moreover he hath not seen the sun, nor known any thing: this
           hath more rest than the other.
Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet hath he
           seen no good: do not all go to one place?
All the labour of man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite
           is not filled.
For what hath the wise more than the fool? what hath the poor,
           that knoweth to walk before the living?
Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the
           desire: this is also vanity and vexation of spirit.
That which hath been is named already, and it is known that it is man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he.
Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the better?
For who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?
A good name is better than precious ointment; and the day of death than the day of one's birth.
 It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting: for that is the end of all men; and the living will lay it to his heart.
Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the
           countenance the heart is made better.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the
           heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to
           hear the song of fools.
For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter
           of the fool: this also is vanity.
Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad; and a gift destroyeth
           the heart.
Better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof: and
           the patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in
           the bosom of fools.
Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better than these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this.
Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to them that see the sun.
For wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence: but the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have it.
Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight, which he hath made crooked?
In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of
           adversity consider: God also hath set the one over against the
           other, to the end that man should find nothing after him.
All things have I seen in the days of my vanity: there is a
           just man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a
           wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.
Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise:
           why shouldest thou destroy thyself?
Be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish: why
           shouldest thou die before thy time?
It is good that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from this withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth God shall come forth of them all.
Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty men which
           are in the city.
For there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and
           sinneth not.
Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou
           hear thy servant curse thee:
For oftentimes also thine own heart knoweth that thou thyself
           likewise hast cursed others.
All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but
           it was far from me.
That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it
           out?
I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out
           wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wickedness
           of folly, even of foolishness and madness:
And I find more bitter than death the woman, whose heart is
           snares and nets, and her hands as bands: whoso pleaseth God
           shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken by her.
Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, counting one by one, to find out the account:
Which yet my soul seeketh, but I find not: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all those have I not found.
Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions.
Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing? a man's wisdom maketh his face to shine, and the boldness of his face shall be changed.
I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and that in
           regard of the oath of God.
Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil
           thing; for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him.
Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say
           unto him, What doest thou?
Whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no evil thing: and a
           wise man's heart discerneth both time and judgment.
Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore
           the misery of man is great upon him.
For he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him
           when it shall be?
There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in that war; neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it.
All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work
           that is done under the sun: there is a time wherein one man
           ruleth over another to his own hurt.
And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the
           place of the holy, and they were forgotten in the city where
           they had so done: this is also vanity.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
           speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set
           in them to do evil.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
           prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them
           that fear God, which fear before him:
But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he
           prolong his days, which are as a shadow; because he feareth
           not before God.
There is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there be just men, unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked; again, there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the work of the righteous: I said that this also is vanity.
Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall abide with him of his labour the days of his life, which God giveth him under the sun.
When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes:)
Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun: because though a man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it; yea farther; though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it.
 For all this I considered in my heart even to declare all this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God: no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them.
All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath.
This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that there is one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead.
For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope: for a living dog is better than a dead lion.
For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not
           any thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory
           of them is forgotten.
Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now
           perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any
           thing that is done under the sun.
Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
           merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works.
Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no
           ointment.
Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun.
Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.
I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the
           swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the
           wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour
           to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.
For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are
           taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the
           snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it
           falleth suddenly upon them.
 This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it seemed great unto me:
There was a little city, and few men within it; and there came
           a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great
           bulwarks against it:
Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his
           wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same
           poor man.
Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless the
           poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.
The words of wise men are heard in quiet more than the cry of
           him that ruleth among fools.
Wisdom is better than weapons of war: but one sinner
           destroyeth much good.
Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honour.
A wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fool's heart at his left.
Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool.
If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy
           place; for yielding pacifieth great offences.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as an error
           which proceedeth from the ruler:
Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in low place.
I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking as
           servants upon the earth.
He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh
           an hedge, a serpent shall bite him.
Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith; and he that
           cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby.
If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must
           he put to more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct.
Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment; and a
           babbler is no better.
The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of
           a fool will swallow up himself.
The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness: and
           the end of his talk is mischievous madness.
A fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be;
           and what shall be after him, who can tell him?
The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because
           he knoweth not how to go to the city.
Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes
           eat in the morning!
Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness!
By much slothfulness the building decayeth; and through
           idleness of the hands the house droppeth through.
A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry: but money
           answereth all things.
Curse not the king, no not in thy thought; and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter.
Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after
           many days.
Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest
           not what evil shall be upon the earth.
If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth: and if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.
He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.
As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the
           bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so
           thou knowest not the works of God who maketh all.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not
           thine hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either
           this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.
Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun:
But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that cometh is vanity.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.
Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them;
While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain:
In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened,
And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of musick shall be brought low;
Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets:
Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern.
Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it.
Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity.
And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs.
The preacher sought to find out acceptable words: and that
           which was written was upright, even words of truth.
The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by
           the masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.
And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and
           keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.
For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
           secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in
           Jerusalem.
Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities;
           all is vanity.
 What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under
           the sun?
 One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh:
           but the earth abideth for ever.
 The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to
           his place where he arose.
 The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the
           north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth
           again according to his circuits.
 All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto
           the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return
           again.
 All things are full of labour; man cannot utter it: the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.
 The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the sun.
Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? it hath been already of old time, which was before us.
There is no remembrance of former things; neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to come with those that shall come after.
I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.
And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all things that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath God given to the sons of man to be exercised therewith.
I have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and,
           behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. That which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which
           is wanting cannot be numbered.
 I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been before me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and knowledge. And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and
           folly: I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.
 For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth
           knowledge increaseth sorrow. I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth,
           therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also is vanity.
 I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What doeth it?
I sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting mine heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was that good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven all the days of their life.
I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me
           vineyards:
I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of
           all kind of fruits:
I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that
           bringeth forth trees:
I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of great and small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem before me:
 I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts.
So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.
And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: and this was my portion of all my labour.
 Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.
And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that which hath been already done.
 Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth darkness.
The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walketh in
           darkness: and I myself perceived also that one event happeneth
           to them all.
Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it
           happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I
           said in my heart, that this also is vanity.
For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool
           for ever; seeing that which now is in the days to come shall
           all be forgotten. And how dieth the wise man? as the fool.
 Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under
           the sun is grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of
           spirit.
 Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun: because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.
And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. This is also vanity.
Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labour which I took under the sun.
For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he leave it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil.
For what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of
           his heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun?
For all his days are sorrows, and his travail grief; yea, his
           heart taketh not rest in the night. This is also vanity.
There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also I saw, that it was from the hand of God.
 For who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto, more than I?
 For God giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God. This also is vanity and vexation of spirit.
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
           under the heaven:
A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a
           time to pluck up that which is planted;
A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and
           a time to build up;
A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a
           time to dance;
A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;
A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time
           to cast away;
A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and
           a time to speak;
A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time
           of peace.
 What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?
I have seen the travail, which God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised in it.
He hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also he hath set the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end.
I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to
           rejoice, and to do good in his life.
And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the
           good of all his labour, it is the gift of God.
I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doeth it, that men should fear before him.
That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already been; and God requireth that which is past.
And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that
           wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that
           iniquity was there.
I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the
           wicked: for there is a time there for every purpose and for
           every work.
I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men,
           that God might manifest them, and that they might see that
           they themselves are beasts.
 For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all is vanity.
All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to
           dust again.
Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the
           spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?
Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better, than that a man should rejoice in his own works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?
So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under the sun: and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter.
Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than
           the living which are yet alive.
Yea, better is he than both they, which hath not yet been, who
           hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.
Again, I considered all travail, and every right work, that for this a man is envied of his neighbour. This is also vanity and vexation of spirit.
The fool foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh.
Better is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full with travail and vexation of spirit.
Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun.
There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he hath neither child nor brother: yet is there no end of all his labour; neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither saith he, For whom do I labour, and bereave my soul of good? This is also vanity, yea, it is a sore travail.
Two are better than one; because they have a good reward for their labour.
For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not another to help him up.
Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can
           one be warm alone?
And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a
           threefold cord is not quickly broken.
Better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish
           king, who will no more be admonished.
For out of prison he cometh to reign; whereas also he that is
           born in his kingdom becometh poor.
I considered all the living which walk under the sun, with the
           second child that shall stand up in his stead.
There is no end of all the people, even of all that have been
           before them: they also that come after shall not rejoice in
           him. Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.
Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more
           ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools: for they
           consider not that they do evil.
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty
           to utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou
           upon earth: therefore let thy words be few.
For a dream cometh through the multitude of business; and a
           fool's voice is known by multitude of words.
When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he
           hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.
Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou
           shouldest vow and not pay.
Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the angel, that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?
21:005:007 For in the multitude of dreams and many words there are also divers vanities: but fear thou God.
21:005:008 If thou seest the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the matter: for he that is higher than the highest regardeth; and there be higher than they.
 Moreover the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself
           is served by the field.
He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor
           he that loveth abundance with increase: this is also vanity.
When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and
           what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding
           of them with their eyes?
The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little
           or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to
           sleep.
There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely,
           riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.
 But those riches perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a
           son, and there is nothing in his hand.
As he came forth of his mother's womb, naked shall he return
           to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labour, which
           he may carry away in his hand.
 And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came,
           so shall he go: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for
           the wind?
All his days also he eateth in darkness, and he hath much sorrow and wrath with his sickness.
Behold that which I have seen: it is good and comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour that he taketh under the sun all the days of his life, which God giveth him: for it is his portion.
Every man also to whom God hath given riches and wealth, and hath given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labour; this is the gift of God.
For he shall not much remember the days of his life; because
           God answereth him in the joy of his heart.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is
           common among men:
A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and honour, so
           that he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he desireth,
           yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger
           eateth it: this is vanity, and it is an evil disease.
If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so
           that the days of his years be many, and his soul be not filled
           with good, and also that he have no burial; I say, that an
           untimely birth is better than he.
For he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and
           his name shall be covered with darkness.
Moreover he hath not seen the sun, nor known any thing: this
           hath more rest than the other.
Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet hath he
           seen no good: do not all go to one place?
All the labour of man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite
           is not filled.
For what hath the wise more than the fool? what hath the poor,
           that knoweth to walk before the living?
Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the
           desire: this is also vanity and vexation of spirit.
That which hath been is named already, and it is known that it is man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he.
Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the better?
For who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?
A good name is better than precious ointment; and the day of death than the day of one's birth.
 It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting: for that is the end of all men; and the living will lay it to his heart.
Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the
           countenance the heart is made better.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the
           heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to
           hear the song of fools.
For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter
           of the fool: this also is vanity.
Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad; and a gift destroyeth
           the heart.
Better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof: and
           the patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in
           the bosom of fools.
Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better than these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this.
Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to them that see the sun.
For wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence: but the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have it.
Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight, which he hath made crooked?
In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of
           adversity consider: God also hath set the one over against the
           other, to the end that man should find nothing after him.
All things have I seen in the days of my vanity: there is a
           just man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a
           wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.
Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise:
           why shouldest thou destroy thyself?
Be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish: why
           shouldest thou die before thy time?
It is good that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from this withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth God shall come forth of them all.
Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty men which
           are in the city.
For there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and
           sinneth not.
Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou
           hear thy servant curse thee:
For oftentimes also thine own heart knoweth that thou thyself
           likewise hast cursed others.
All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but
           it was far from me.
That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it
           out?
I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out
           wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wickedness
           of folly, even of foolishness and madness:
And I find more bitter than death the woman, whose heart is
           snares and nets, and her hands as bands: whoso pleaseth God
           shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken by her.
Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, counting one by one, to find out the account:
Which yet my soul seeketh, but I find not: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all those have I not found.
Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions.
Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing? a man's wisdom maketh his face to shine, and the boldness of his face shall be changed.
I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and that in
           regard of the oath of God.
Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil
           thing; for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him.
Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say
           unto him, What doest thou?
Whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no evil thing: and a
           wise man's heart discerneth both time and judgment.
Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore
           the misery of man is great upon him.
For he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him
           when it shall be?
There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in that war; neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it.
All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work
           that is done under the sun: there is a time wherein one man
           ruleth over another to his own hurt.
And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the
           place of the holy, and they were forgotten in the city where
           they had so done: this is also vanity.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
           speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set
           in them to do evil.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
           prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them
           that fear God, which fear before him:
But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he
           prolong his days, which are as a shadow; because he feareth
           not before God.
There is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there be just men, unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked; again, there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the work of the righteous: I said that this also is vanity.
Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall abide with him of his labour the days of his life, which God giveth him under the sun.
When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes:)
Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun: because though a man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it; yea farther; though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it.
 For all this I considered in my heart even to declare all this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God: no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them.
All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath.
This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that there is one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead.
For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope: for a living dog is better than a dead lion.
For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not
           any thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory
           of them is forgotten.
Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now
           perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any
           thing that is done under the sun.
Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
           merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works.
Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no
           ointment.
Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun.
Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.
I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the
           swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the
           wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour
           to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.
For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are
           taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the
           snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it
           falleth suddenly upon them.
 This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it seemed great unto me:
There was a little city, and few men within it; and there came
           a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great
           bulwarks against it:
Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his
           wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same
           poor man.
Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless the
           poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.
The words of wise men are heard in quiet more than the cry of
           him that ruleth among fools.
Wisdom is better than weapons of war: but one sinner
           destroyeth much good.
Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honour.
A wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fool's heart at his left.
Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool.
If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy
           place; for yielding pacifieth great offences.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as an error
           which proceedeth from the ruler:
Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in low place.
I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking as
           servants upon the earth.
He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh
           an hedge, a serpent shall bite him.
Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith; and he that
           cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby.
If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must
           he put to more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct.
Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment; and a
           babbler is no better.
The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of
           a fool will swallow up himself.
The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness: and
           the end of his talk is mischievous madness.
A fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be;
           and what shall be after him, who can tell him?
The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because
           he knoweth not how to go to the city.
Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes
           eat in the morning!
Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness!
By much slothfulness the building decayeth; and through
           idleness of the hands the house droppeth through.
A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry: but money
           answereth all things.
Curse not the king, no not in thy thought; and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter.
Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after
           many days.
Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest
           not what evil shall be upon the earth.
If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth: and if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.
He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.
As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the
           bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so
           thou knowest not the works of God who maketh all.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not
           thine hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either
           this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.
Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun:
But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that cometh is vanity.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.
Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them;
While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain:
In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened,
And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of musick shall be brought low;
Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets:
Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern.
Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it.
Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity.
And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs.
The preacher sought to find out acceptable words: and that
           which was written was upright, even words of truth.
The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by
           the masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.
And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and
           keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.
For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
           secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.



